In regards to Medicaid expansion in Idaho, the Idaho Legislature has proposed work reporting requirements. These requirements have already been deemed illegal in three other states. They aren't asking for the same requirements on any Obamacare policy, just medicaid. This is discrimination against our poorer citizens who have already fallen through cracks without health insurance since obamacare was implemented. Feels morally wrong to me.
hello
I care deeply about this issue.
I cannot even imagine who thinks work reporting requirements are a good idea for people who need Medicaid! Grow a little humanity, why dontcha?
As a pharmacist, I directly observe on a daily basis how the complexity of the healthcare system affects patients. Navigating prescription coverage is difficult even as a highly trained healthcare professional; even most pharmacists balk at the thought of calling an insurance company.

Work reporting on top of dealing with healthcare issues will only cause further undue stress for patients and their families...keep in mind the actual Federal Poverty Level for a 2 adult household: approximately $17,000. Personally, I would categorize even a 2 adult household at 138% of the poverty level ($23,335) as truly needing Medicaid services. Imagine, on top of working multiple jobs, perhaps childcare, attending medical appointments, and surviving on less than $25,000 a year, you had to report your working, volunteering, or job training hours.

Reporting requirements dont guarantee increased participation in work programs; instead they guarantee that people will fill out paperwork the wrong way, jeopardizing their coverage. In fact, other states have seen significant coverage losses simply by the confusion caused by this policy. Idaho will see the same.

In summary, I oppose the addition of any occupational requirements to the expansion of Medicaid in Idaho. As has been stated much more eloquently by others, work reporting requirements only add barriers to access, with little to no benefit in return. Why would we want to increase the expense and administrative burden of Medicaid with no benefit to the people of Idaho? Because of these reasons, I oppose this application and ask that it not be implemented in Idaho.
My family has lived within the Medicaid gap for some time. I have a full-time job as well as two other jobs that I work to try to make ends meet. But health care insurance is extremely expensive, even for hard-working Americans like myself.

I voted for Medicaid expansion to close the states coverage gap. But I believe restrictions are hurtful to Idahoans by creating more hurdles to jump and more loopholes to have to find to go through. Its only preventing people from getting access to health care, and will be a burden on those who are already struggling to make ends meet.
I 100% Oppose this Medicaid Work Reporting Requirement in Idaho. There are so many people who are sick and need medical attention who are waiting for disability. They get denied disability because they aren't taking their medication. They get denied disability if they aren't seeing their doctor however, how can they when they don't have insurance? This is far too general and will only HURT Idahoans who fall in the cracks and don't have the medical insurance they so desperately need. I implore you to please consider who this hurts. We are humans and this work requirement will unequivocally hurt those who needs the most help with medical insurance.
Idaho doesn't provide much support for its citizens that are near and below poverty. Adding work restrictions to health care is simply punitive and flies in the face of the intent to provide base level support safety net support. It is challenging to get a state referendum ratified in Idaho however it was accomplished to get medicaid expansion into law in spite of the refusal by the state legislators. In return the legislators added work requirements and attempted to increase the burden of the state referendum process which was vetoed by the newly elected governor. The voters of the medicaid expansion laws didn't include work restrictions. I urge you to deny Idaho's exemption to include work restrictions.
As an Idaho physician, I strongly oppose adding work requirements to Medicaid in Idaho. This will lead to loss of coverage for our most vulnerable community members, decrease access to health care for patients with disabilities, and drive up health care costs for everyone.
In November, 2018, 61% of Idahoan voters passed Proposition 2 for Medicaid Expansion. This was a clean bill without a waiver adding work requirements. The intention was to provide health insurance to people who are working lower paying jobs and who do not have access to group health insurance through their employers. The work requirements added to this bill by the Idaho Legislature put an unnecessary burden on people who would otherwise qualify.
The Idaho legislature refuses to listen to the voices of Idahoans via the ballot initiative. WE voted for the expansion of Medicaid in Idaho. We did NOT vote for restrictions imposed by a legislature who denied the will of the people for the prior 6-7 years. Please deny this waiver request and save the taxpayers of Idaho the cost of litigation that they are sure to lose.
As a citizen of Idaho I voted yes on Medicaid expansion for our state. I OPPOSE work requirements as a condition of Medicaid expansion. These work requirements would add unnecessary costs and could threaten coverage to those people "in the gap" that do not qualify for affordable health care currently, because they do not have a high enough income. By requiring this Idaho will increase the number of people with NO insurance at all which could drive up the rate of insurance premiums for all and threaten to overburden the county indigent program. Again I am wholeheartedly opposed to placing restrictions on Medicaid expansion in Idaho.
I am writing this email to notify you that I am against "reporting requirements" on Medicaid Expansion.

As someone who volunteers at my local food bank over 20 hours per month I would have problems proving that I do so. I don't receive a pay stub, have direct employer verification, or other forms of direct proof. That means that I would not be covered by Medicaid Expansion. I'm sure that there are many more people in my situation.

The reporting would probably be done online. Since many rural areas do not have access to the internet, they would not be able to prove that they work. And some people would probably not be aware of the necessity of reporting this information. They would fall into another Medicaid gap.

Again, as someone who volunteers at my local food bank I can tell you that the majority of people that come in to get food are already working; making them prove it would increase the chances that they would not be able to satisfy the "reporting requirements", causing them to fall into another Medicaid gap. Plus, tracking of reporting requirements come with an additional cost.

Please do NOT approve "reporting requirements" on Medicaid Expansion.

Lisa Loret
2293 Darah Street
Idaho Falls, Idaho
83402
Medicaid expansion is to help provide the working poor with health care. THIS NEEDS TO BE DONE

Adding burdensome reporting costs taxpayer dollars to establish and staff another government department. Working poor people don't have time or resources to file paperwork. Plus, it's demeaning!
The voters of Idaho approved Medicaid expansion in 2018. Tens of thousands of our family, friends and neighbors are waiting for health care, which I believe is a human right. Placing restrictions on Medicaid expansion violates the will of the voters, endangers the health of Idahoans, and forced Idaho to lose millions of federal dollars. Please respect the will of the voters.
We in Idaho voted to close the medicaid gap and we want if left how it passed. Thank you
I can't get SSI because was denied 25 years ago in Idaho even though I was deemed disabled at that time, due to I shouldn't have these issues, so I can't work and I can't afford to get new testing done and have lived with this chronic debilitating pain for the last 25 years, I can no longer work with more bad days that good and have not been able to in over 5 years and still get denied for SSI because I don't have anything new to provide for them on the state level , so cannot get medicaid due to not having minor children. It is to the point that the doctors are even telling me I would have to move out of state to get any help, I can take very limited medications due to the way I react to them, and sometimes forgo the one I can take or doctors visits due to lack of a way to pay for them. If it wasn't for an adult son helping me , and the backing of the community I live in I wouldn't have a roof over my head or anything to even eat. My son has to Adult son sometimes has to take FML to take care of me on really bad days, but they still say they will not help, I can work if SSI has denied m even if I can't .
Idaho citizens voted across this remote state to expand Medicaid to cover the population that falls into the coverage gap. This population is being hurt daily by this states decision not to take the federal funds to cover this population. The voters of Idaho voted over 60% to right this wrong. I urge you to support the voice and vote of the people.
The people of the state of Idaho made it very clear in the last election that we strongly support increased medicare coverage for low income individuals in our state. We did not vote for any limitations such as work reporting requirements. Our state legislature is not in agreement with the will of the people and is asking for these requirements in direct opposition to the documented will of their constituents. I strongly urge you to consider the will of the people of the state of Idaho, and not the will of our current legislature and eliminate any work requirement for expanded medicare coverage in the state of Idaho. [Insert Comment Here]
These restrictions used in other states have proven to be unduely costly and have resulted in many people losing their critical health care coverage. The majority of Idahoans have rejected these restrictions but the legislature has ignored the voice & will of its citizens. As a taxpayer I resent having to pay for burdensome and costly bureaurocracy which makes it virtually impossible for those needing health insurance to comply with these restrictions. Please refuse to allow these restrictions.
I oppose medicaid work reporting requirements in Idaho for the reasons explained in Close the Gap Idaho email. It would lead to coverage losses for indefinite periods of time.
WORK REQUIREMENTS ARE ILLEGAL.
I believe I have written before about stating my serious opposition to the Medicaid work reporting requirements in Idaho. I signed the original petition and I continue to voice my concerns:
1. Idaho has purposefully ignored public concerns of Idaho's flawed exemption process annd how the proposal will lead to coverage losses for indefinite periods of time. The individuals receiving coverage currently are the poorest of the poor, most of whom try to work in some way to make ends meet. They are proud people but they need medicaid help, not restrictions. I know at least one person who needs this assistance, still works manual labor jobs and is breaking down physically at almost 70 years of age.
2. Many Idaho officials fail to acknowledge public support and held hearings only a block apart, ignoring federal requirements to hold public hearings in less than a week's notice and in geographically distant locations.
3. These same Idaho offcias acknowledge that work requirements will cause massive coverage losses.
The people of Idaho have spoken. The Idaho officials need to move forward with more than a disavowal of the public's desires in this matter.
I voted for a clean bill not work requirements.
The fact that people need medical care is simply unrelated to the idea that people need to work. In addition, for the majority who do work, why would we make it more difficult and spend taxpayer money in the process? The vast majority of people who receive Medicaid are struggling, and creating more hurdles for them is unethical. Please reject this disturbing restriction.
Thousands of seasonal workers who have to string together numerous seasonal jobs over 12 months would lose coverage because of the onerous reporting requirements needed for the work status reporting. And when they lose their employment because of injury or illness and need professional care the most, they would be least able to qualify. The proposed work requirements go against the purpose of Medicaid and should not be approved.
I believe the Sec. 1115 waiver being sought should not be allowed as most of the people in the Gap are working and the waiver will cause people in Idaho to lose coverage as it did in Arkansas.

Thousands of Idahoans could lose coverage under this penalty for failing to fill out paperwork correctly or for not knowing about it in the first place even if they meet the so-called work requirements mandated under state law.
[Insert Comment Here]Respect the will of the voters. No restrictions!
Idaho voters already cast their votes. Please, close the gap as was our wish in the election, and with NO Medicaid restrictions. Thank you.
The State of Idaho is intentionally disregarding the desire of its residents, and the precedents set by other states, and doing everything it can to harm its vulnerable populations by trying take Medicaid away from them. They are doing this because they are mad that the people of Idaho voted for Medicaid at the ballot because they refused to listen to the voters. What they are doing is illegal, and they know it. Below are the reasons this cannot be allowed.

Idaho Purposefully Ignored Public Opposition and Technical Flaws with the Proposal

During the state comment period over a thousand comments pointed out Idahos flawed exemption process, how the proposal would lead to coverage losses for indefinite periods of time, and how the policy is illegal and will result in far more Idahoans losing coverage than the state predicts. None of these flaws or concerns are resolved in the application.

While testimony and comments on the state application were overwhelmingly opposed to the proposal the application submitted to CMS does not acknowledge this fact.
Idaho held both hearings only a block apart, two days apart, on less than a weeks notice, ignoring the federal requirement to hold public hearings in geographically distinct locations.
Work Requirements Will Cause Massive Coverage Losses

Idahos application concedes that 16,000 otherwise eligible Idahoans could lose coverage as a result of the proposed policy.

If Idaho experienced the coverage loss percentage of 23% that Arkansas did, the true coverage losses could be close to 21,000 or more. Idahos policy is harsher than Arkansas because coverage will end after one month instead of three.
Work Requirements Could Threaten Care for Idahoans with Disabilities

Work requirements also harm people with disabilities or poor health who face significant barriers to work. Filing for an exemption is an extra hoop to jump through for Idahoans with disabilities and could result in unnecessary coverage losses that would exacerbate their health issues.
Work Requirements Result in Higher Health Care Costs for Everyone

Work requirements in Arkansas drove up the uninsured rate for adults age 30-49 by 38%, and could have similar effects in Idaho. This would result in higher premiums for everyone.
Work Requirements Dont Result in Higher Rates of Employment

Counter to the claims made in the application, research suggests that healthier people are more likely to be able to work. There is no evidence that work requirements improve
Idaho has ignored public opposition and technical flaws in Idaho's work requirement proposal.
During the state comment period over a thousand comments pointed out Idahos flawed exemption process, how the proposal would lead to coverage losses for indefinite periods of time, and how the policy is illegal and will result in far more Idahoans losing coverage than the state predicts. None of these flaws or concerns are resolved in the application.

While testimony and comments on the state application were overwhelmingly opposed to the proposal the application submitted to CMS does not acknowledge this fact.
Idaho held both hearings only a block apart, two days apart, on less than a weeks notice, ignoring the federal requirement to hold public hearings in geographically distinct locations.

Work Requirements Will Cause Massive Coverage Losses

Idahos application concedes that 16,000 otherwise eligible Idahoans could lose coverage as a result of the proposed policy.

If Idaho experienced the coverage loss percentage of 23% that Arkansas did, the true coverage losses could be close to 21,000 or more. Idahos policy is harsher than Arkansas because coverage will end after one month instead of three.

Work Requirements Could Threaten Care for Idahoans with Disabilities

Work requirements also harm people with disabilities or poor health who face significant barriers to work. Filing for an exemption is an extra hoop to jump through for Idahoans with disabilities and could result in unnecessary coverage losses that would exacerbate their health issues.

Work Requirements Result in Higher Health Care Costs for Everyone

Work requirements in Arkansas drove up the uninsured rate for adults age 30-49 by 38%, and could have similar effects in Idaho. This would result in higher premiums for everyone.
Work Requirements Dont Result in Higher Rates of Employment

Counter to the claims made in the application, research suggests that healthier people are more likely to be able to work. There is no evidence that work requirements improve employment. In Arkansas, employment rates declined after work requirements were implemented.
Work Requirements are Illegal

Idahos proposal is no different from proposals in Arkansas, Kentucky, or New Hampshire where this policy has been deemed illegal. This waiver will only hurt Idahoans, and violate the central tenet of Medicaid, which is to provide health coverage, not take it away.
The waiver is a way to put an ill family at Financial Risk of Medical Bill Bankruptcy. This scheme has been used to transfer assets and Teal Estate to Government Insiders. Its wrong. 30 other states do Not add these Financial Risk Do Not Pay schemes.
We have All been ill, having to work while Ill is Not good for me, my kids, and grand kids who eat out in restaurants where an ill food server could pass along a disease to us.
I have been in fast food restaurants with an obviously ill food server.
In spite of an overwhelming vote supporting Medicaid Expansion without any waivers in Idaho the legislature insisted on ignoring the will of the voters and attaching several waivers to their bill to expand Medicaid. Their waivers hinders the implementation of Medicaid Expansion by making it difficult for all individuals in the health care gap to comply with the waivers added and s a result in effect excludes and estimate of 10,000 to 20,00 individuals from receiving the health care intended by the electorate. I request that you reject all of the legislature imposed waivers and approve a clean Medicaid Expansion bill as approved by Idaho votes last November.
Idahoans voted to expand medicaid and make it easier to get coverage not to have a bunch of obstacles put in there way. I appose medicaid restrictions added to the bill that was passed.
Idahos State Legislature passed a law seeking to restrict access to Medicaid Expansion in our state despite the fact that 61-percent of the voters passed a clean Medicaid Expansion bill via initiative. Idaho State has now decided to ignore the overwhelming response of its citizens and send the waiver for approval holding only two hearings within two day that were only a block apart in location.
The purpose of Medicaid Expansion is to provide healthcare access to low-income Idahoans on a routine basis. I believe that the most effective health care results from an ongoing relationship between the health care provider and the patient. Providing healthcare access to these people is going to make them more productive at work and at home, which will make their communities and our state stronger.
Idahos work requirement is a cynical attempt to limit the availability of effective health care for some of my fellow citizens. As you well know, the vast majority of people in the gap population work, some of them work multiple jobs in order to feed and house their families. This restriction is not a work requirement but rather a paperwork penalty. It will force some to choose between filling out paperwork or feeding their family. When these citizens lose insurance coverage, they will be forced to seek expensive emergency room care. Not only is this more expensive, but it is inefficient. In some cases, for example diabetes, treating the crisis does not resolve the problem or reduce the potential for catastrophic problems in the future.
For the reasons set forth above, I would encourage you to deny this restriction to Medicaid Expansion in the State of Idaho.
Thank you for your consideration.
Sincerely,
The people of Idaho have voted to have no work restrictions on the Medicaid Reform bill. Please don't allow our Legislators to change what we have voted for, because they do not represent what the people of Idaho truly want for our state. We are tired of our elected officials doing what they want instead of doing what the people who they represent want. Thank you for your help in this matter.
These working people are asking for help. By the time that they pay for a house payment, food costs, car expense, utilities, clothing, insurance, medical expense and other personal items, they do not have enough left to pay for health insurance.
The state of Idaho has revealed, yet again, how biased our leadership is in favor of undereducated, white Christian (or LDS) men. A patriarchal society is the only one our legislature seems to be acknowledge.
Ignoring the cast majority of public comments about restricting family planning services for women (and men) who are enrolled in Medicaid is completely typical for those old white men from the conservative communities here in Idaho. This waiver creates a barrier to health care for women, PERIOD! It keeps young women in poverty, in false relationships, and in captivity as surely as chains and walls.
Access to family planning, which began in earnest in the 60's, is responsible for entire generations of women having the ability to make choices about their bodies and about their education, careers and life direction. And here in Idaho you can be married off by your parents at age 13...lets not forget about that little piece of Idaho backwoods thinking.
Forcing women to get "permission" from a primary health care provider in order to receive family planning (aka birth control which, of course, their male counterparts don't give a thought to) is discriminatory and wrong. Stop abuse of females.
To all reviewing the Medicaid work requirement, please oppose this costly & loss of coverage for the very sick, those with disabilities, those who barely have enough hours to qualify for help. This reform waiver is not what 62% of IDAHOANS voted for. It is imperative that you honor the voters who worked diligently to pass a clean Medicaid Expansion Bill. It's time for our voices be heard. Thank you.
i AM CATEGORICALLY OPPOSED TO HAVE A WORK REQUIREMENT TACKED ONTO THE MEDICAID FOR ALL PROPOSAL WE, AS IDAHO VOTERS, DID NOT VOTE FOR. It adds a huge unnecessary expense, over 16,000 potential medicaid recipients would lose their coverage, it threatens care for Idahoans with disabilities AND is illegial. This is an awful, stupid, unnecessary proposal. Leave the Medicaid for all alone.
Please reject Idaho's proposed restrictions to Medicaid expansion. They are not honoring the will of the people.
To Whom it may concern:
I am an Idaho resident voter and I voted for Medicaid Expansion. The Idaho Legislature has attached expensive, dysfunctional, punitive work reporting requirements for all beneficiaries. This serves only to punish those who apply as the vast majority are unable to work. This will cause coverage losses and hurt the people it is meant to help. Also, as an Idaho taxpayer, I will pay for the needless bureaucracy required to deal with these requirements. Finally, these types of work requirements have been deemed illegal in many other states.
Most people in this gap, which expanded Medicaid will fill, are already employed. Some of those who are not are folks with health problems, and hopefully getting them care will increase their ability to get and keep a job. The others are usually parents of young children. Most of these a moms with no affordable daycare options, no summer care options. If we are truly a conservative state we want moms of every income to be able to stay at home and care for their children.
This work reporting requirement thing is just more abject cruelty from the GOP. Many people who need medicaid find it very hard, if not impossible, to work at all.
The voters in Idaho overwhelming approved Medicaid Expansion at the polls last November. The State legislature attached waivers which will not only result in many people losing their coverage, but will also cost an unbelievable amount of money to implement. Legislators claim that the paper work requirements for a 20 hour per week job requirement will be easy to do--my husband and I have to fill out all kinds of documentation for our son who has a mental illness. This is a bureaucratic nightmare! This will be no different for the thousands of people who will be forced to do the same!!!
[Thank you for the opportunity to comment. I am against the work requirements for Medicaid. This requirement came on the heels of expanding Medicaid to cover the working Americans in the gap. Working Americans. These requirement are onerous and should not be allowed to take effect.
]
I firmly oppose restrictions on the expanded Medicaid law that was passed overwhelmingly by Idaho voters.

Idahoans did not vote for work requirements. Work requirements would cut out coverage for the people who need it most. That is, the people who live in rural areas with limited opportunities to find employment.

Also, the people who may lack access to computers and internet access, or who do not know how to use them. They may be unable to comply with the work requirements. They could go to a library, but they may lack transportation to get there.

Work requirements are overly burdensome; will cut people out of coverage; and will demand an expensive regulatory bureaucracy.

I urge you not to approve this waiver.
Put in place what the people voted for. Get rid of the Medicare work requirements!
We voted for expansion. You work for the people, do your job!!
[Insert Comment Here) I oppose the Medicaid work reporting requirements that are being underhandedly attached to this legislation passed by the people of Idaho. You could be ashamed of yourselves depriving people of basic health care!
Thank you for the chance to comment on the 1115 Waiver Application regarding work requirements for Medicaid Expansion in Idaho.

Please do not go forward with this burden to Medicaid Expansion in Idaho.

It is a costly bureaucratic burden for our government and our tax payers. It will be like starting a new small business within our government. We will need to hire entire teams of people to manage this unnecessary and ridiculous system! Offices! Furniture for those offices! Well need to write up new policies and procedures! New human resources people to manage the new people! Well need new information systems, phone lines, web pages! Well add more work to our payroll staff. The list goes on.

It is a costly court-battle burden for our government, our tax payers, and our system in general. Why does Idaho need to be the state to try this out in the courts? Ive heard legislators say that the court costs wont fall to Idahoansbut somebody will pay for it. Other Americans will pay for it! Its a waste of money and resources when we have so many other important things to figure out here in America.

Most importantly it is a high-cost, high-stakes burden for our fellow Idahoans who need Medicaid coverage. Arkansas is a clear example that this type of paperwork penalty will remove as many as 21,000 Idahoans from coverage. Think about it for any person who already workshaving to prove you work in order to get your health care. And think about it for the many people who have more than one job, who work seasonally, who lose their jobs due to illnessits heartbreaking that the burden of proof is being shoved off onto our most vulnerable citizens.

Hidden language in the law restricts women from seeking family planning services without first getting permission from a primary care doctor. This is discriminatory. Dangerous.

Please give us a clean implementation of the Medication Expansion that we voted for. Its the most effective, most efficient way.
Some people are not mentally capeable of doing the paperwork and they would get kicked off medicaid
It seems our Idaho leaders don't want to listen closely and do what the voters have asked for.

Medicaid is a special coverage for those who are down and out in so many ways. Why insist they stand up for their rights extraordinarily. What about those who don't have the ability to report in and/or even hold down jobs when circumstances might prevent them from responding or understanding the requirements. These people need our help and support. How can "all" citizens be put into a box when we know that doesn't work for all.

[Insert Comment Here]
I voted in favor of expanding Medicain under Proposition 2 in Idaho. I do not favor additional bureaucracy or restrictions on those who need and qualify for Medicaid. I do not support the work requirement or any further state rules. I just want folks to have medical coverage. Period. No more rules! I just want to have Medicaid expansion implemented in accordance with existing Federal law, no additional state restrictions.
Medicaid Work requirements are a very Bad idea. This will hurt everyone on the program including myself. They want to do this because our Gov. only cares about the wealthy and the rich for more tax breaks. They don't care about Idahoans or anyone who isn't one of them at all,. That's the reality. Me I can not work at all cause of my Disability. If I loose my Medicaid I will be very unhappy. I think the same for everyone else who is on this program like me.
To whom it may concern:
Hi, my name is Amy Hansen. I have Generalized anxiety disorder and a child with autism and anxiety. I was in a car accident when I was pregnant with him. I struggled with regular employment. I have had several jobs in the last 2 years when I am between jobs is when I need my medical services the most. It is extremely challenging to balance my health needs and my childs while working even part time.
In addition to that I have an aunt that died after she left a mental health facility because she did not have the means to have after care treatment after being in a mental health facility. Work requirements is like going to the menthal health facilities where people are institutionalized, telling them they should leave now because they are fine and work so the can keep their health insurance. It's an oxy moron. It doesn't work on so many levels and in so many ways.
Please consider these as you make federal mandates on work requirments with the medicaid expansion.
Sincerely,
Amy Hansen and family.
[listen to your constituants with regards to Medicaid expansionInsert Comment Here]
I am a citizen of Idaho and a retired social worker who has dealt with many people seriously in need of medical care and who are not internet literate and who also do not have the means to travel to assistance with computer info. Work requirements are Idahos method to stop any further medical service or continued to thousands of Idahoans. Its crazy that state and federal legislators deny access to medical care that is very accessible to them.
I worked very hard to see that the Idaho voters got the opportunity to vote to support expansion of Medicaid, without restrictions. I sent my comments to the Idaho Department of Health and Welfare in opposition the the work requirement waiver request. Over a thousand other Idahoans sent pleas to drop the work requirement. Idaho chose to ignore what the citizens wanted, AGAIN, and made no changes to the application. Please do not allow Idaho to limit our Medicaid Expansion with work requirements.
I believe that the waiver requiring able bodied adults to report their work activities on a regular basis in order to receive Medicaid benefits is not necessary. Those people must be working in order to have income in the Gap range, of $12,450 or more per year. This requirement has been determined to be illegal in other states, and should not be required for Idahoans.
I am appalled at the effort by Idaho lawmakers to undermine the expansion of Medicaid that the voters overwhelmingly approved, by adding an illegal and ineffective work rule. This adds unnecessary bureaucracy and complexity that will cost even more taxpayer dollars to enforce and cause thousands of working people to fall off the health insurance rolls. It is punitive and will roll back the progress and community benefits promised by the Medicaid expansion that we voted for. This has been proved ineffective and illegal in other states. Dont let Idaho waste its time and money by allowing the work requirement rules to go forward.
Do not put restrictions on Idaho's Medicaid coverage. The people who need the medical coverage do not need more handicaps. Please listen to the will of the Idaho voters.
[Insert Comment Here]This sickens me. This attack on people who need health coverage through Medicaid is disgraceful. My disabled adult son can NOT go without Medicaid. Why in the world would the state of Idaho want further hurt and endanger lives by taking health care away if this requirement is not met?
Idahoans did not vote for work requirements, we voted for Medicare Expansion with no extra costs for work restrictions and the expenses to administer those restrictions. It makes no sense to subject residents to additional costs. No sense! We voted to improve the lives of Idahoans who fell through the cracks with no insurance. We did not approve this costly burden imposed by Idaho State Gov.
[Insert Comment Here]I request your action to prevent the State of Idaho from implementing illegal work reporting requirements.
The public does not want Idaho State to impose restrictions on Medicaid. I, for one am sick and tired of you ignoring the voice of the people who are struggling to live here.
I see millions of dollars wasted on your lawyers trying to make laws that are unfit for our public. We do not need another bulky, old fashioned administration personal that strap the people from receiving this service.
I oppose Medicaid work requirements. They are illegal, add barriers for people who need healthcare, and add unnecessary costs to our healthcare system. Please expand Medicaid in Idaho without a work requirement, as the voters voted for.
please reject the Medicaid restrictions.
Healthcare has become restrictions and rules, and prior authorizations, appeals, non-formulary...
Not individual case care.
Cms reject Medicaid Restrictions.
Work requirements are just another way to prevent the hardworking people of Idaho from getting the healthcare they deserve. The amount of paperwork necessary to apply for Medicaid makes it even more difficult to get coverage and will exclude more working people who just dont have the time in their 16 hour 7 day/ week jobs than it will non-working individuals. Please consider the consequences of your actions!
Healthcare is not optional.
[IWhen we voted for the Medicaid for all in Idaho, we did not vote for any restrictions to be applied. I am very disappointed that restrictions are being considered Medicaid for all who cannot afford regular insurance will actually save Idaho money. I recently cut my finger and went to emergency room in Kootenai medical center in Coeur d-alene, All they did was press the cut together, super glue it and put a bandaid on it and the bill came to $1250. If a person is ill or injured and has no insurance, they will go to emergency rather than go to a physician. The physician would charge just a fraction of what the hospital does. We are paying for people who have no insurance every time they go to emergency at the hospital. If they had insurance they more than likely would go to their physician.]
This is utterly ridiculous! The voters were heard over a year ago and the Idaho Republicans are still diddling around with this.

We voted to EXPAND MEDICAID. We did NOT vote for all the conditions that the Idaho GOP is trying to impose - which are flawed to the point of IMPOSSIBLE right out of the gate!

Elizabeth Clark
daho Purposefully Ignored Public Opposition and Technical Flaws with the Proposal

Over a thousand comments pointed out problems with Idahos application during the state comment period and the state ignored these concerns and made no changes to the application.

Work Requirements Will Cause Massive Coverage Losses

Idahos application concedes that 16,000 could lose coverage. Idahos policy would kick people off coverage after one month of missing a deadline. True coverage losses in Idaho will likely exceed 21,000 people.

Work Requirements Could Threaten Care for Idahoans with Disabilities

Filing for an exemption is an extra hoop to jump through for Idahoans with disabilities and could result in unnecessary coverage losses that would exacerbate their health issues.

Work Requirements are Illegal

Idahos proposal is no different from proposals in Arkansas, Kentucky, or New Hampshire where this policy has been deemed illegal. This waiver will only hurt Idahoans, and violate the central tenet of Medicaid, which is to provide health coverage, not take it away.
I am opposed to the Idaho Legislature's decision to ignore the will of the voters and impose work requirements on Medicaid recipients.
Idaho voters do not want expensive paperwork penalties. Until the money-driven health insurance industry is overturned, we must have accessible, affordable options for all. Your job status should not affect your right to a healthy life.
Idaho voters do not want expensive paperwork penalties. Until the money-driven health insurance industry is overturned for the murders they commit, we must have accessible, affordable options for all. Your job status should not affect your right to a healthy life.
The people of Idaho will not be ignored on this issue. Work requirements are illegal and they would only hurt Idahoans, not help them. It's a flawed waiver. It would increase costs and jeopardize health care for thousands of Idahoans.
Higher costs and reduced healthcare coverage is not the objective here.
Please reject the proposed Medicaid restrictions and allow the law to implemented as passed by a large majority of Idahoans.
Thank you for your consideration of the facts.
Idahoans with Disabilities may have even more problems keeping records, accessing computers and filling out forms than most people. Filing for an exemption is just an extra hoop to jump through for Idahoans with disabilities and could result in unnecessary coverage losses that would exacerbate their health issues.
Putting "Sideboards"on Medicaid Expansion passed by Citizens Initiative
with 61% of voters that bypassed 6 years of Obstruction
with the Legislature blocking Medicaid Expansion.
Obvious to me and the thousands of Unpaid
Non partisan Volunteers were successful
Because 61% knew Medicaid Expansion
Was the Right Thing to do as friendss
And Relatives were dying that could have
Been prevented with affordable healthcare
Access to Healthcare who, for financial reasons,
Self medicated and would be alive today.
The Rural Hospitals in Idaho do Not support
"Sideboards or Waivers" as they put the
Rural Hospitals at Financial Risk.
The political party domination in Idaho,
During the years before passage of Medicaid
Expansion were on record to kill
ACA. At a forum in Pocatello in June 2018,
one of the 2 Idaho Congressmen
Stated "When we Repeal Obamacare,
, We Make Money, OK?
The "Sideboards aka Waivers" will put low income
Families at Risk of Medical Bill Financial
Risk and the stated position of the Idaho
Congressman will be reality.
The 365,000 Voters wanted no draconian
"Restrictions that these Sideboards represent so
"We Make Money, OK".
Please dont inflict Idaho citizens in the Medicaid gap with needless work restrictions! Its unfair to those without Internet, transportation or who are too ill to turn in the paperwork! Its a punishment! The whole point of expanding Medicaid was to include those who fell into the gap and to take advantage of the federal funds that have been rejected by our lawmakers in the past! If they have to mess around with red tape, they may loose coverage because of unforeseen circumstances! Not to mention, the cost of the unnecessary paperwork implementation! Let the law be as it was voted on. Idahoans lives depend on it and the people voted in favor of this fair and square. We have spoken. People CAN die from not having health insurance!
I am opposed to imposing work requirements on our Medicaid Expansion program here in Idaho. This waiver, if implemented, will cost millions of dollars to prove that a few thousand people who are not granted exemptions are actually working. There will be thousands of people who should qualify for Medicaid but who will fall through the gap because of changes in their work situation or challenges with filing and accommodating the reporting requirements, thereby defeating the goal Idaho voters had when they overwhelmingly voted to pass and implement a clean Medicaid Expansion program. The Idaho legislature is simply not listening to the people whom they profess to represent by trying to implement these restrictive and unnecessary restrictions through this waiver. Please, listen to the will of Idaho voters and do not approve this restrictive and undemocratic waiver.
Please reject the Medicaid restrictions!!!
Medicaid is not a work bill. It is a medical care access bill!

The poor suffer the most in our society, and in the State of Idaho, because too many of our citizens are not paid a living wage. Their very existence depends on assistance for food, housing, healthcare and other needs. In most cases, it is not their fault that the only work they can get are the lowest paying jobs and sometimes are only able to get part time work especially in our more rural areas. Because of pre-existing medical conditions and unmet healthcare needs, many cannot work the number of hours required because of ongoing healthcare needs in addition to the lack of job opportunities. Too often, they do not have sick leave benefits and therefore are the ones most likely to be let go from a job because of medical issues. For too many, healthcare is needed first before employment can be obtained and will be needed for them to stay employed.

Most of the new recipients of Medicaid in Idaho will already be working, but are paid too little to afford healthcare on their own or to get health insurance on their own, and do not get insurance through their employers. Even if it was offered, they would be receiving wages too low to be able to accept it. These same people frequently do not have the resources to, or knowledge of how, to comply with unnecessary work reporting requirements.

I stood up for a clean Medicaid expansion by getting signatures for the clean Medicaid expansion initiative, voted for it, and encouraged others to vote for it, although none needed that encouragement; they already agreed. I testified at numerous legislative hearings against work requirements and other restrictions including the heavy burden of proving their employment with continual work reporting requirements. No one else who works and has medical insurance has to face such requirements; their employers do the reporting. Why should the most vulnerable in our state be subjected to such requirements? In all of the hearings I attended, everyone who attended was against the work requirements except for one person who testified at every hearing for the requirements. It was always the same person who was being paid by a foundation to testify for them. The committees always voted with that one person. The opinions of the other hundreds of people in attendance were ignored.

The work reporting requirements will cost our state tens of millions of dollars to support them in ongoing recording and maintenance costs. It wou
I'm strongly against imposing work reporting requirements on the Medicaid expansion in Idaho. Such requirements run contrary to the purpose of Medicaid and will likely cause thousands of people to lose coverage.
[Our state isn't listening to us. I oppose Medicaid work requirements and the extra hoops they want to impose that make it harder to keep the coverage needed]
Please do not add a work requirement to the Medicaid for all plan that has been approved by the citizens of this state. Doing so indicates that you arent listening and do not care about your constituents. And will have an effect on your political future. Thats not what we asked for.
Idaho voters supported a clean Medicaid Expansion, not one with work requirements. We don't want sick individuals to loose coverage just because they were too ill to comply with extra requirements. Idahoans do not want the cost of administering these requirements. I oppose this waiver.
Do right by the people of Idaho and reject all Medicaid restrictions. The Idaho Way is for clean medicaid expansion as a clear majority of 61 percent voted for. Voters knew what we voted for and we will know who not to vote for when you go against our interests.
Having been an Eligibility Examiner, I see no benefit to recipients or the state to employment requirements for Medicaid Expansion. These requirements are strictly punitive and obstructive. Idaho has the most restrictive rules already, leaving the working poor without resources to afford healthcare given the low minimum wages.
To Whom it May Concern, to just put simply, work requirements are illegal. They have been found to be so by every court in which they have been tried.

In addition, the public is OPPOSED to these measures. The Idaho legislature is simply pushing these requirements as a revenge move against the voters.
I'm opposed to work requirements. It has NOT to workrd in other states that implemented it. Many Idahoans are at risk of losing coverage & we did not vote this in when Medicaid expansion was ein at the polls.
Similar policies enacted in other states have shown that work requirements will cause massive coverage losses and increase health care costs for everyone by driving up the uninsured rate for adults, which results in higher premiums on the state exchange and an increase in uncompensated care costs for hospitals.

Even working Idahoans who are eligible for Medicaid could lose coverage due to complex monthly reporting requirements. I have several coworkers who fall into this group. Most Idahoans who can work are working. These requirements have led to thousands losing coverage with no increase in employment rates.

In addition, work requirements require dozens of new full time employees and millions of additional dollars to administer, a huge waste of taxpayer money. And let's not forget that work requirements have been deemed illegal in federal court and will cost time and money in lawsuits.

The people of Idaho voted to expand Medicaid. It is outrageous for our elected representatives to ignore our voice and work instead to impose costly and unnecessary barriers to healthcare coverage. I and the majority of my fellow Idahoans oppose these restrictions on Medicaid.
I am writing to express my opposition to Idaho's proposed Medicaid work reporting requirements. As an Idaho citizen, I signed the petition to get Medicaid expansion on the ballot, and just like 61% of Idahoans, I voted for a clean Medicaid expansion without any work requirements. I, along with many Idahoans, told the legislature that I did not want work requirements, and yet the Idaho legislature completely ignored Idaho's citizens and went forward with the work requirements, without any changes whatsoever.

Since our state legislature has refused to listen to what the citizens want, it is now up to you.

Work requirements have already been proven to not work. In Arkansas, the work requirement process increased the uninsured rate for adults age 30-49 by 38%.

Work requirements would also cost money the state does not have: Idaho's own government estimates that administering the work requirements program would cost 4-5 million. This is money the state could use in ways that help its citizens rather than punish them.

Work requirements are also illegal. Idaho's proposed work requirements are no different from those in other states (Arkansas, Kentucky, New Hampshire) that have already been judged illegal.

Finally, the citizens of Idaho voted for Medicaid expansion because they wanted to make health care accessible and affordable to the thousands of people in Idaho who did not make enough money to afford insurance. We voted to take care of our people, not punish them for being poor.

Please support Idaho's citizens: Reject Idaho's request for Medicaid Work Reporting Requirements.

Thank you.
Please reject Idahos request for a waiver. The majority of Idahoans strongly support Medicaid expansion, without restriction, as passed by 61% of Idaho voters in 2018. Idahos application contains numerous technical flaws. If approved, the waiver will pose a danger to our state and will severely impact our communities. .
These Medicaid restrictions are a BLATANT disregard of the expansion we voted for. We have already spoken as an electorate on this issue, honor that.
I am strongly opposed to Medicaid work reporting requirements proposed by the State of Idaho. I am a Idaho resident; I voted for a Medicaid expansion because I think that all people in the gap need health care, no matter what.

This work requirement will result in fewer people being covered [many people in this income bracket have limited access to the Internet and transportation; standing in line in a government office is not an option for those with families and working a low wage job(s)]. It will cost the state more money to administer and add to bureaucracy. Those who stay in the gap will continue to seek their only option for healthcare in ERs--which the counties end up paying. Adults without healthcare do not get the care needed to prevent chronic diseases, especially diabetes and heart disease.

The State's assumption that people in this income bracket [too high to qualify for regular Medicaid and too low to qualify for subsidies on the exchanges] are lazy and will stop seeking work if they get access to healthcare is not supported by evidence. Instead, we know that most of the people in the gap are already working.

The Idaho Legislature should have respected the will of Idaho voters. Their proposals to block accessibility to decent healthcare for the working poor should be denied.
Despite all of the people who appealed to lawmakers to not include work restrictions that would cause huge coverage losses, including those with disabilities, and despite they have been found illegal in other states, they ignored our citizens' pleas.

Please reject Medicaid work reporting requirements for our state.

Thank you.
I have worked with blind individuals and other with significant disabilities since 1981.

None of these people live "high on the hog" as is often said by people who are against services to people who are under employed, or not employed due to their disability.

Rules are strict; examiners don't let unqualified applicants receive benefits.

Supposedly, we are the richest country in the world.

I don't see it here in Idaho. People who spend their lives working for retailers have found themselves no longer working 40 hours a week and thus not eligible for benefits. Unless one works full time for the government can benefits be assumed.

I know many people who are receiving Medicaid for workers and that extra help with Medicare fees being paid and some additional help with prescriptions and medial appointments allows them to remain as healthy as possible. That goes away at age 65. Then what!

Please don't stop "Closing the Gap", we voted it in...We need it!
Please take care of the people in Idaho. It is the legislative body who ignores the people's initiative. The people's initiative did not add work requirements because it just adds to the cost of implementing the program and adds more handicaps to Idahoan in need. I definitely oppose Medicaid work reporting requirements. Sincerely, Bette M. Hovey, Boise, Idaho.
I oppose Medicaid Work Reporting Requirements in Idaho. The people of Idaho voted for Medicaid Expansion with no work requirements or other waivers. Work requirements would prevent many Idahoans from receiving health care. It would add layers of expensive bureaucracy-dollars that could be better spend on health care for the uninsured. It will add barriers that will decrease the number of Idahoans eligible for health care. It makes absolutely no sense to add work requirements. Please reject this waiver which is designed to restrict Idahoans access to the health care they desperately need and deserve.
[Insert Comment Here]Everyone deserves health care.
The people of Idaho have voted to expand Medicaid because it makes better financial sense, as well as providing coverage for people who are not currently eligible. To apply work requirements or any other obstacle to the coverage is to defeat it's purpose. Please Do Your Job! Implement what the people voted for. Your job, afterall is to represent us
Work requirements go against the very heart of what voters overwhelmingly backed at the ballot box. It is time to institute the full Medicaid expansion that we voted for.
Idaho citizens by a substantial majority passed an initiative to expend Medicaid to the working poor under the Affordable Care Act, after the Idaho legislature had failed to do so for several years running. The legislature responded by attaching procedural "sideboards" including double consultation for family planning services and documentation of employment or prescribed equivalents. They have dug in their heels on the community engagement waiver, even though citizen comments at the state level opposed it. As an Idaho citizen I repeat my opposition to this "community engagement" waiver request. It is unnecessary, because most of the beneficiaries of Medicaid expansion are already working, going to school, and/or caring for children. Asking them to submit frequent verification paperwork is a waste of their time and the time of public employees who will have to process it. In addition, many Idahoans work at seasonal jobs or part-time jobs that may not come up to the standard number of hours every week. Repeatedly dis-enrolling and re-enrolling such workers fulfills no legitimate public purpose. It is just busy work. Please reject Idaho's application for a "community engagement" 1115 waiver.
Darcy James
See attached letter
Thank you for this opportunity to comment. In short, let me just say - the ill advised state work requirements are both vindictive and illegal. The people of Idaho spoke with a clear voice when they passed Medicaid expansion. Now, elected officials are doing their level headed best to dismantle the expansion before it starts.

If work requirements are enacted something like 20,000 Idahoans will lose coverage. Additionally, Idahoans with disabilities will have even more tedious paperwork standing between them and the help they need. Worst of all, the courts have found similar work requirements illegal in other states so the legality of these work requirements is highly questionable. Sadly, its likely that these work requirements will end up in court wasting millions in tax payer dollars only to be found illegal.

Needless, hurtful, and downright mean spirited - State officials are operating from a purely political playbook that ignores the will of the people in order to please one faction of the Republican Party. Ironic since the vast majority of conservative voters supported the original initiative.

Stop these work requirements before they start.
I voted for a clean bill with out work requirements. Work requirement will cause massive coverage losses.
I voted for a clean bill without work requirements which will cause massive coverage problems.
I am a physician candidate of 2020. I grew up in a poor and rural family in Idaho. While I have transitioned our of the low socioeconomic milieu of my childhood, most in my family will not in the foreseeable future. My nephews and nieces rarely see a provider outside the emergency department because they do not have health care coverage. future. As such, the idea of imposing unneeded restrictions on access to healthcare that is already so hard to acquire is especially appalling to me. The fact of the matter is that placing such stringent requirements on access to Medicaid has proven in many other states to do nothing more than deny thousands of people the right to see a physician when ill. Please reject the proposed limitations and minimum work requisites and allow Medicaid expansion to finally happen in idaho. Thank you.
I oppose the waiver in any shape or form.
Ultimately, the work requirements proposed by Idaho's legislature will not be cost effective and do not reflect the reality of the average household who will be gaining access to critical healthcare through Medicaid expansion.

Idahos application concedes that 16,000 could lose coverage. Idahos policy would kick people off coverage after one month of missing a deadline. True coverage losses in Idaho will likely exceed 21,000 people.

I strongly oppose this waiver and encourage CMS to consider both the broad impact on families losing coverage and the reasonableness of the proposed work requirements compared to the goals of Medicaid and the will of the majority of Idahoans.
Please reject Medicaid restrictions. We voted and we dont want it. As a treatment provider, I know firsthand how imposing restrictions hurts Idahoans. You cant work unless youre healthy. You cant get better without treatment. You cant get treatment without coverage. Rejection restrictions, put Idahoans first!
It is so wrong to insert these work requirements into the Medicaid policy for Idaho. Too many hoops and requirements, which will make qualifying for Medicaid and then having to review and renew monthly is too difficult and cumbersome! It appears to be an attempt to reduce people getting Medicaid. This is a badly needed program for Idaho that Legislature has refused to address for years. The plan the people voted for was without all these complications and loopholes. Get this program working for the people of Idaho the way we voted for it!
We worked hard to pass Medicaid expansion in Idaho, and there are no valid reasons to add work requirements. The 61% of Idahoans who voted to expand Medicaid voted to have it implemented exactly as it was explained in the ballot initiative; we want everyone covered who should be covered. Work requirements will prevent perhaps 16,000 people from getting coverage who should be getting coverage, based on the ballot initiative. I strongly believe that the will of the voters should prevail, with no extra hoops to jump through in order for those in need to get Medicaid coverage.
Work requirements are not an efficient use of Medicaid and its service to the public. It's also illegal. Listen to the people!
I Oppose Medicaid Work Reporting Requirements in Idaho. Idaho Purposefully Ignored Public Opposition and Technical Flaws with the Proposal.
This requirement to prove that you are working in order to get Medicaid is ridiculous. This is NOT what we voted for, despite you Republicans opposing what our President Obama presented to EVERY STATE. EVEN BUTCH OTTER AND HIS WIFE RAN A TELEVISION AD URGING THE PASSING OF PROPOSITION 2.

Please...let people have health care. I went without for years and years...with four children...and we just had health problems that could have been cured with the ability to go to a doctor! And get medications! STOP requiring 20 hours of work. Most people who need this Medicaid DO work! But can't afford the $1200 per month for a family of four!! PLEASE. PLEASE HELP IDAHOANS TO HAVE HEALTH CARE WITHOUT SPENDING MORE TIME AND MONEY ON FILLING OUT REAMS OF PAPER WORK TO PROVE THEY ARE GOOD WORKING PEOPLE. This will only cost Idaho MORE money to continue to monitor this type of requirement!
Please reject/deny Idaho's work waiver request. The work requirement puts undue hardship on working poor, mentally ill and those with substance use disorders. Many in this population have lower level literacy skills along with their current status in the lower level wage category.

The work requirement for medicaid expansion discriminates against this group while general medicaid does not have this requirement.

thank you for rejecting the work waiver request by the state of idaho.

James Rehder
208-507-0536
With additional paperwork restrictions involving work requirements, Medicaid will cost our state of Idaho millions of dollars every year, and right now, the state revenues are already predicted to be 70% lower than thought due to the new tax law. Idaho will have to hire dozens of employees to sort, receive and manage paperwork and electronic communications and to penalize people for making paperwork mistakes. Errors in paperwork will cause an enormous secondary gap made up of people who may not realize that they need to report, such as Idahoans with disabilities or poor health who cannot work due to their medical conditions, and people with fluctuating work schedules like farmers, laborers, and students, who may not meet the requirements every reporting period. Restrictions like these were struck down by the U.S. District Court in both Arkansas and Kentucky, and these cases were paid for with taxpayer dollars. The same will happen to Idaho if these restrictions to Medicaid Expansion are allowed to be instituted. We voted for pure and simple Medicaid Expansion, with no work requirement restrictions! Please honor our votes!
You must reject any diminishing of our Medicare program. Too many people rely on our Medicare system and it is necessary. Access to healthcare is a basic human right!
Republicans aren't paid to look after their constituents. They're paid to look after themselves.
If the waivers that the Idaho legislators want are applied to the Medicaid expansion that the citizens of Idaho worked so hard to qualify for the ballot last fall and worked so hard to explain the bipartisan initiative to our neighbors and which was voted for by 61% of our voters, people with undiagnosed conditions will not be able to get coverage. People like our daughter, through no fault of their own, due to illnesses that prohibit their abilities to fill out or follow up on never ending government paperwork will fall through the cracks. Our daughter is inflicted with mental illness, as are thousands of Idahoans. Her condition interferes with all of her life. She cant tuck it away to comply with ongoing conditions that will decide if she gets medical care.

Mental illness is just one of the conditions that will inhibit Idahoans from complying with the conditions of the proposed waivers. You have to have health before employment but the waivers demand you have employment before health. How does that make sense?

As Idahoans, I can not believe that we and all Idahoans will be paying the legal fees for litigation to defend the Idaho legislators backwards mandates. These waivers have failed in other state court decisions. Please do not let their intentions to put their brand on a law created by their citizens happen. Idahoans have spoken as to our intent on the Medicaid expansion. It is to be left as we voted, without waivers and restrictions.

Government is for the people, not for the legislators.
[When the voters of Idaho passed Medicaid expansion, they did not specify a work mandate as a need to qualify for Medicaid -- because a work requirement would gut the initial intent of the law as the voters passed it. The state of Idaho seems to be ignoring the voice of the voters in the state. A work requirement would: ignore the public opinion; cause massive coverage losses; threaten the care of disabled Idahoans; AND a work requirement is illegal.]
Medicaid work requirements are a very bad idea. They will harm and hurt people who rely on this program and service. They will do more harm then good. It will drive the murder and suicide rates up. Please don't pass these awful requirements that hurt people on Medicaid?
There are many who have an invisible medical condition that prevents them from employment. This is about medical insurance. Please leave it at that. Not to mention this requirement will cost a lot to implement... Please spend the money for medical needs and not more red tape and paper pushers.
Reject Medicare restrictions.
I oppose the work requirement for Idaho Medicaid Expansion. The expansion was approved by voters to provide medical coverage to WORKING people. If they need care for a period, they should not lose coverage. Please reject this waiver.
I oppose all Medicaid restrictions to legislation re. Medicaid legally voted into place in the state of Idaho.
[Voters, idahoan voters, voted abundantly clear and chose to close the coverage gap, not open a new one through work reporting requirements. The technical flaws with the application, the impacts on our communities, and the danger this policy poses to the state is outrageous to deny the voters their vote. The state has ignored these concerns and made no changes to the application. Despite this, Idaho chose to make zero changes to the application and only read through comments for 4 days before sending it to the federal government for review.

If this policy is approved we know it will be challenged in court. Prevent thousands of Idahoans from losing their Medicaid coverage. Idahos application concedes that thousands could lose medical coverage. Idahos policy would kick people off coverage after one month of missing a deadline. Filing for an exemption, an additional hardship for those living with physical hardships, an extra hoop to jump through for Idahoans with disabilities and could result in unnecessary coverage losses that would exacerbate death, for the disabled who have well documented health issues. And for what means stall tactics, manipulating the disabled further with delaying litigation when known full well that work requirements will only hurt Idahoans, and they violate the central tenet of Medicaid, which is to provide health coverage, not take it away. That's one reason why courts found CMS approvals illegal in very similar work requirement proposals in Kentucky, Arkansas, and New Hampshire]
Access to healthcare is essential for all Americans. Restricting access to a program that makes healthcare available to Idahoans or any Americans is a step backwards and we will fight it every step of the way. If these restrictions move forward, you will not being doing the will of the people.
Having people with a disability apply for a waiver is beyond asinine. People capable of full filling work requirements are the only ones who should be applying for a waiver and drug testing should be mandatory for benefits.
The Idaho Association of Commerce & Industry has attached a Oct 14, 2019 comment letter in opposition to the Idaho Medicaid Reform Waiver.
I oppose the restrictions on Idaho Medicaid.
Please dont restrict Medicaid!
I oppose Medicaid work reporting requirements in Idaho.
We should learn from other state mistakes and reject restrictions to Medicaid. This year, 18,000 Arkansans lost coverage for failure to comply with the work requirements. In Kentucky, by the States own estimate, 95,000 Kentuckians would lose coverage if the waivers restricting access took place. Moreover, the confusion and uncertainty adds to the burdens of individuals and families who are already struggling to make ends meet and adds additional pressure to those already living with complex medical needs such as those with disabilities.
I am opposed to attaching conditions to the Medicare bill. The bill should be passed as the referendum was written.
Please oppose NO Extra regulations for Idaho Medicaid requirements. It would affect so many people the bill is trying to protect. Thank you, Carissa
We the people of Idaho voted overwhelmingly in favor of Medicaid for the needy of Idaho. For some reason you feel you think you have the right to limit our voice and vote. Do not try to limit the will of the people. Our same vote could vote you out of office. If you were in medical need and had not the money , you too would want Medicaid. Only those of privilege , power, and position would ever do such a dastardly , heartless act. I, as a person of privilege and wealth was able to receive wonderful medical care when I developed Lymphoma, M.E. and fibromyalgia and had to go on disability. Without my position and benefits, I would have died on the streets. But for the Grace....
Please reconsider any further actions to weaken expansion of Medicaid. Idahoans passed an Initiative for this expressing their will. please honor the will of the voters.
Please stop disregarding and disrespecting the voters! You work for the voters and we pay your salaries!
[ Medicade health coverage helps Idaho's most frail and vulnerable]
We cannot continue to absorb the astronomical costs involved with uninsured persons in Idaho. We must close the gap between those of privilege and those with no privilege at all.
ALL persons deserve to have health care.
Please vote Medicaid for all. Close the gap!
Work requirements typically impact the poorest on Medicaid. The process in Arkansas failed miserably. I am open to a work program separate from Medicaid. Why not make it impact tax returns at the end of the year. You don't attempt to work you don't get a tax return. Attack the behaviors not the programs.
Please follow the will of the voters. We don't want Idahoans to lose coverage & we don't want our neighbors and friends to jump through hoops to maintain Medicare coverage. We voted to reject restrictions.
Everyone gets health care, either through insurance paid for doctor visits or expensive ER visits.

Lets stop playing games and make health care cheaper and keep it available to all through Medicaid.
rt Comment Here] please leave our Medicare alone. We need it to live and make ends meet . Thank you
[I am on SSDI and have no other financial aid. My doctor left me on Prednison instead of eight days, eight years which caused a rare disease called Cushings.
I need to have my Medicaid!!!! Commenttt Here]
I totally oppose the restriction proposed to force people to work a number of hours per week in order to qualify for Medicaid.

This will only cost the tax payers more money.
Reject Medicaid restrictions
I whole heartedly oppose the medicaid work requirement reporting clause. It would create an unnecessary tangled mess and result in folks who qualify to not be covered if they can't keep up or make a paperwork mistake. Imagine preexisting health issues (which may not be protected in future) with intermittent coverage, imagine folks working two jobs with irregular work hours, it adds stress to those barely getting by. We can cover them without creating more barriers and bureaucracy. I feel that politicians have failed us, the people voices were finally heard and its their way of not complying, which is disheartening at best and verges on being unethical when not needed. Other states have tried and the negative results are clear. It has an inverse effect of how we want these folks to be helped and covered. Do what's right and remove this terrible piece of the expansion to close the gap!
Please do not add restrictions to Idahos Medicaids expansion. I am on Medicare and I have a supplement but I have so many friends that cant afford health insurance. My next-door neighbor who is in her 30s has just been diagnosed with MS. Already Medicaid isnt paying for some of the tests that she needs on a yearly basis. I doubt that shell ever be able to work anymore than part time. Please reconsider these restrictions.
Stop messing with health care and things you do not understand. Hurting people is bad politics.
Everyone deserves to have comprehensive medical care.

Please reject any restrictions on Medicaid.
Forgot to comment.. wanted to say ... is so important to people who are low income and have no place to go for help. Dont mess with it. I dont need it myself but thousands of people do. Pretend like your mother was poor and you were just scraping by and. Hold t help her. Use some empathy.
PLEASE do not place restrictions on medicaid patients to access medical care. A vast majority of people in the medical "gap" population work.
So this restriction is not a "work requirement' but rather a paperwork requirement. These restrictions will not only cost more money due to added systems and people to administer them, but will create another "gap" of people who will lose healthcare coverage due to failure to submit paperwork correctly or in a timely manner. And once again these people will have to rely on emergency room care also costing more money and will defeat the purpose of expanding medicaid.

Some people claim that working makes you healthy, but in fact the correlation goes the other way. You just be healthy in order to work and keep a job. When people can't take are of their health, they have to miss work and usually get fired. And we start the cycle all over again.

Idaho claims to stand for less government and saving money and yet they want to add an expensive reporting system and add more bureaucracy.

Please deny this restriction and implement a clan medicaid expansion the 61% of Idahoans voted for.
Please no bureaucratic restrictions on how Idahoans plan their families!

Reject Medicaid restrictions.
I oppose the 1115 waiver application for the following reasons and urge you to deny the application:

1. There is ZERO data that support the claim that having people fill out their work hours promotes employment. Good and effective health policy should be based on research and facts - this is neither. The paperwork requirement only adds barriers to enrollment and will very likely result in thousands of Idahoans to lose their healthcare coverage and create a secondary health care gap.

2. The Dept. of Health and Welfare has yet to define how the completion of these requirements will work for individuals effected by them. Idaho is a vastly rural state with limited broadband coverage. Access to healthcare will be effected if people cannot submit the requirements on time. Medical and pharmaceutical treatment of chronic conditions are likely to be interrupted when a person loses coverage and could result in worsening health or possible death.

3. The cost of implementing this program is estimated to be in the hundred of thousands of dollars with no proven result that shows reporting requirements get people off public assistance or get better paying jobs that have private health insurance. Majority of people on Medicaid have low-wage jobs that do not have health coverage and will likely stay working in low-wage jobs. This application does not provide for job training that would actually help people get better paying jobs.

For these reasons I ask that you deny the application.
Please do NOT restrict Medicaid!!! It is already restricted by income. We need to help those that are working and trying to make a difference and are underpaid or have expensive insurance options!
Work requirements add bureaucracy, costs and in other states have prevented eligible people from keeping expanded Medicaid healthcare coverage. Also, states have been involved in costly litigation and have lost these cases. Other states with work requirements have kicked people off Medicaid who qualify, but cant manage the reporting rules. Im disappointed that Idaho is fighting to keep low income from accessing healthcare. Its unnecessary, costly and its not what I voted for. Also, our rural hospital systems need support to keep the doors open and uninsured patients are a drag on the bottom line for these critical access care hospitals. Please keep expanded Medicaid intact for Idaho and do not allow a work requirement waiver.
I oppose work reporting requirements for Idaho. We voted for this to move forward. Why do you keep trying to add roadblocks?
The state of Idaho has ignored the will of the people who voted for Medicaid expansion, without work reporting requirements. The state has ignored thousands of follow up comments opposing the work requirement proposal suggested by our legislature (and thousands of comments is a lot, for our low population state).

As a physician who's practiced in this state for more than 20 years, I've taken care of vast numbers of uninsured patients. It's time to do the right thing.

Work requirements have NOT been show to increase employment levels. They decrease access to care and have been determined to be illegal elsewhere.

Please support the will of the people in Idaho.
Requiring work reporting would hurt Idahoans who are unable to find work in this depressed time in Idaho. There are very few job opportunities in the winter in Idaho as it is and this would be a huge burden on the working poor in Idaho. Plus it is usually redundant any way as most poor are already working and still can't afford health care in this state. Stop the bureaucracy and help the people of our state get health care.
October 14, 2019

U.S. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
7500 Security Boulevard
Baltimore, MD 21244

RE:Idahos Application for Section 1115 Medicaid Waiver for Community Engagement/Work Reporting Requirements

Dear CMS:

On behalf of the 3000+ physician members of the Idaho Medical Association (IMA), thank you for the opportunity to provide comments in opposition to Idahos 1115 Medicaid waiver application to CMS for implementation of work reporting requirements. IMA is the leading organization representing physicians in all specialties, practice settings and geographic locations in our state, and is recognized as the voice of medicine in Idaho. IMAs mission is to unify and advocate for all Idaho physicians, promote the art and science of medicine, and remain dedicated to improving the health and well-being of all Idahoans.

The IMA Board of Trustees adopted policy on Medicaid expansion stating that IMA will not support any provisions that:
Lead to delayed implementation of Medicaid expansion
Add administrative burdens and costs to the state in administering Medicaid expansion
Take away coverage from eligible individuals or are punitive in nature
The provisions of the 1115 work reporting waiver application will not lead to delayed implementation of Medicaid expansion in Idaho but will undoubtedly add administrative burdens and costs to the state that could otherwise go toward helping Idahoans.

IMAs greatest concern is the potential for eligible Medicaid expansion participants to have their coverage taken away not for being without a job, but for being unable to comply with burdensome reporting requirements. In states where work reporting requirements have been enacted, thousands of otherwise eligible Medicaid recipients lost health coverage, and some even lost their jobs.

IMA physicians know that having coverage and access to healthcare is often the key for some people with chronic conditions to be able to work in the first place. Taking coverage away from individuals in this situation will not lead to greater levels of employment in our state.

IMA, along with over 1400 other individuals and entities, made these arguments in opposition to Idahos waiver application during the state comment period. However, no changes were made to Idahos application despite 97% opposition from commenters.

IMA respectfully asks CMS to reject the above-referenced 1115 waiver application in its entirety. Thank you for your consideration.

Sincerely,

Susie Poul
People need health care, not additional penalties for being sick or disabled or poor.
I oppose the 'work requirement' in Idaho's Medicaid expansion, it is just plain mean.
I do not support a work requirement for medical coverage. I believe medical care in an advanced economy should be a right to begin with, but... Forcing work only removes people from care that are in a gap of trying to get either on their feet or get disabilty. Medical expenses and medications that are needed to help people work or maintain stability should not have a requirement to work. It only penalizes the sick and infirm.
The propose work requirements will cause massive coverage losses. Those who are able to work are probably working but do not earn enough at their jobs to qualify for coverage under the ACA. Record keeping of hours worked or in approved training or volunteer activities are undue burden burden for those who need medical coverage. They would have to fill out online forms or fill out forms manually and mail.them in monthly. Monitor compliance with the work requirements will also increase the cost for the all Idahoans.
Pass a clean bill as voters intended - No work requirement. It won't accomplish the stated goals, but will cost taxpayers money and keep people from getting needed medical coverage. You're supposed to reduce useless government red tape, not create more. This waiver is purely ideological revenge.
Dear Sir, Idahoans passed an initiative detailing how they want Medicaid expanded. The legislature is trying to change the bill to include work requirements. This is not what Idahoan want - please oppose this proposal.
I oppose Medicaid Work Reporting Requirements in Idaho.
Please reject the Medicaid Work Reporting Requirements in Idaho. Many will lose coverage.
The people of Idaho spoke strongly to support Medicaid expansion without these onerous and bureaucratic requirements.
I am very disappointed the elected officials of Idaho in their determination to ignore the opinions of citizens and force feed conservative notions that people needing aid are slackers. I oppose Idaho's proposed work requirement demands which is aimed to not offer coverage to the people who need it. These work requirements are yet one more hoop for low income people with disabilities and are aimed to subvert the purpose of Medicare, which is aimed to extend coverage not revoke it. Courts have found these proposals illegal in other states. I oppose these power grabbing, "we know best" tactics of our patriarchal controlling state officials.
I am vehemently against imposing work documentation requirements on Idahos Medicaid Expansion. Other states have found that administering work requirements for Medicaid recipients: 1) is expensive; 2) has little cost to benefit ratios; and 3) for a variety of reasons, has resulted in many qualified people losing their Medicaid coverage.

What I feel is even more insidious is that work requirements reflects our cultural bias against low-income individuals and families. We have a culture in our country that divides people into 2 classes; deserving and undeserving. This class distinction is largely based on wealth with the higher income people perceived as deserving and low-income people undeserving. What are considered incentives for high income people are considered handouts for low-income people.

Altering Medicaid expansion legislation to include work requirements would: 1) demonstrate contempt for the democratic process; 2) disrespect for Idaho voters; 3) disregard for taxpayers; and 4) disdain for the hard-working, yet low-income Idahoans whose health and lives would benefit from Medicaid expansion.
I support Medicaid expansion in Idaho as an expedient & proven way to get much-needed health care insurance coverage to a significant number of people who currently do not have it, due to their financial circumstances. On the other hand, I oppose the work requirement built into the request approved by Idaho's legislature. The work requirement would impose an unnecessary burden on the poor seeking Medicaid coverage. It would exclude many people from access to Medicaid and violate the spirit and a founding principle of the Medicaid program itself. The work requirement was not a precondition for Idaho citizens, the great majority of whom voted in a statewide referendum to support Medicaid expansion.
[Insert Comment Here]This is like "voter suppression"...cease the "trumpian insanity" and do the moral and sane right for the citizens of Idaho in need of this protection!
As an Idaho tax paying resident and constituent, I am disgusted to learn that the work requirements side boards have been added to the Medicaid expansion passed by an overwhelming majority in Idaho. I pay a heck of a lot of taxes as a multiple property owner, income earner, and purchaser subject to sales tax on all I purchase. I wanted Medicaid expansion and voted to help ensure it was made available to qualifying participants because I know it actually saves the state and nation money to ensure health, avoid emergency room visits, access to preventative care, and allows our indigent fund to focus on the true needs the fund was designed for, not qualifying Medicaid recipients.

I now hear you put the side board work requirements into place in any event, at a tremendous added cost to me the tax payer in administrative and processing fees for a step that is already assured. If the participants weren't working, they would already qualify for benefits and not be in the gap! Your obstinate indifference to these issues only shows your lack of leadership and wisdom, all while taking money directly out of my pocket.

Honor the will of the people. Idaho wanted and still wants Medicaid expansion without side boards. The people of Idaho know personally those most affected by this disgraceful, special interest lobby maneuver and it only gets worse by the day as you delay, shuffle about, and in other ways don't do your job. I've been patient, now I'm getting frustrated. Why don't you get a work requirement process in place for the darn legislature because I in no way see you accomplishing anything except hold the working Idahoan hostage over horrid policy choices. You think doing nothing is good governance, but lives are lost over your tongue in cheek lip service. An elderly woman in Rexburg can't make her appointment right now because of your delay. Get to work and stop wasting our tax payer dollars making Medicaid less effective.

A hard working, private insurance paying, frustrated Idahoan who has learned what this legislature's "work requirement standard" really is.
Idahoans have paid into the Medicaid and Medicare system since their inception. Our State Legislature sees fit to refuse money from the Federal Government; OUR Money! Many Thousands of Idahoans depend on Medicaid and Medicare for what little medical care they are able to receive. We need Idahos SHARE of the Medicaid and Medicare Funds. Otherwise the Legislature by default rations the care and who receives it. This wrong and certainly UN-AMERICAN.Which of Our Lords many Gifts and Favors will we continue to deny?
To: Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services
Idahos State Legislature dislikes when their voters do not behave as they are told. They refused to expand Medicad for years and did their best to restrict Idahos initiative process to prevent themselves from being forced to by the majority of voters in the state. We have a highly gerrymandered state. Finally their efforts failed, but now their request for the Sec. 1115 waiver continues their efforts to defy the will of any voters they havent managed to train.
I believe the Sec. 1115 waiver regarding so-called work requirements will penalize working Idahoans, restrict the number of otherwise eligible recipients (between 100-138% of the federal poverty level) who will receive healthcare access and create a second gap of Idahoans who will be forced to seek costly emergency room care even though they qualify for Medicaid benefits. I base these beliefs upon the state of Idahos own numbers regarding these matters, categorically ignored by the legislature because they do not fit the desired fairy-tale narrative.
1.The purpose of Medicaid Expansion is to provide healthcare access to low-income Idahoans. Many of these people have not seen a doctor in their adult lives. Providing healthcare access to these people is going to make them more productive at work and at home, which will make their communities and our state stronger. Making these working families fill out paperwork on a regular basis puts this objective at risk. Also, it is a penalty intended to punish those who opposed the legislature.
2.The vast majority of people in the gap population work. As such, this restriction is not a work requirement but rather a paperwork penalty. We saw disastrous results in Arkansas where nearly 18,000 people lost coverage last year because they failed to fill out forms correctly. Nearly 90-percent of those people were still without coverage in early 2019. If you apply those same percentages to Idahos working poor, more than 21,000 Idahoans could lose coverage under this penalty for failing to fill out paperwork correctly or for not knowing about it in the first place even if they meet the so-called work requirements mandated under state law.
3.Because of this, Idahos paperwork restrictions will create a second gap of thousands of people who lose healthcare coverage for their failure to submit paperwork correctly/timely. As a result, they will be forced to seek expensive emergency room care. This will only increase costs
Everyone should have access to health care. This includes the poor and near poor.

The Idaho State Legislature's law seeking to restrict access to Medicaid Expansion is ill-conceived. 61% of voters passed Medicaid Expansion via initiative. This law tries to overturn the voters intent.

the Sec. 1115 waiver regarding so-called work requirements penalizes working Idahoans, restricts the number of otherwise eligible recipients (living at 100 to 138% of the federal poverty level) who can receive healthcare access, and creates a group of Idahoans who will be forced to seek care in the emergency room -- even though they qualify for Medicaid benefits.

The purpose of Medicaid Expansion is to provide healthcare access to low-income working Idahoans. Currently they are underserved. Health care access improves people's well being and makes people more productive at work. More paperwork puts up another barrier to getting health care.

None of us needs another barrier when we are trying to make sure our children are healthy, or find care when we are sick.

This proposal is not a work requirement. It is paperwork penalty. It will result in less access to health care. For example, in Arkansas, 18,000 people lost coverage last year simply because they failed to fill out forms correctly.

Idahos proposed paperwork restrictions will lead to thousands of people losing their healthcare coverage simply because they fail to submit paperwork correctly or in a timely manner.

Forcing people to resort to the emergency room for care only increases costs to Idaho taxpayers. It's also inefficient and defeats the whole purpose of expanding Medicaid.

Idahos public comment period generated thousands of responses opposing so-called work requirements. The Idaho Department of Health and Welfare appears to have done nothing to change the application, ignoring the overwhelming opposition to Idahos paperwork restrictions to Medicaid Expansion.

For these reasons and more, I would you to deny this restriction to Medicaid Expansion in the State of Idaho. A federal judge has already done so 3 times. There is no reason to believe the judge will do any differently in Idahos case. Thank you for your consideration.

Sincerely,

Margaret Sherraden
Sagle, Idaho
To: Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services

Idahos State Legislature recently passed a law seeking to restrict access to Medicaid Expansion in our state despite the fact that 61-percent of the voters passed a clean Medicaid Expansion bill via initiative. I believe the Sec. 1115 waiver regarding so-called work requirements will penalize working Idahoans, restrict the number of otherwise eligible recipients (between 100-138% of the federal poverty level) who will receive healthcare access and create a second gap of Idahoans who will be forced to seek costly emergency room care even though they qualify for Medicaid benefits.

The purpose of Medicaid Expansion is to provide healthcare access to low-income Idahoans. Many of these people have not seen a doctor in their adult lives. Providing healthcare access to these people is going to make them more productive at work and at home, which will make their communities and our state stronger. Making these working families fill out paperwork on a regular basis puts this objective at risk.

The vast majority of people in the gap population work. As such, this restriction is not a work requirement but rather a paperwork penalty. We saw disastrous results in Arkansas where nearly 18,000 people lost coverage last year because they failed to fill out forms correctly. Nearly 90-percent of those people were still without coverage in early 2019. If you apply those same percentages to Idahos working poor, more than 21,000 Idahoans could lose coverage under this penalty for failing to fill out paperwork correctly or for not knowing about it in the first place even if they meet the so-called work requirements mandated under state law.

Because of this, Idahos paperwork restrictions will create a second gap of thousands of people who lose healthcare coverage for their failure to submit paperwork correctly/timely. As a result, they will be forced to seek expensive emergency room care. This will only increase costs to Idaho taxpayers, provide inefficient healthcare to recipients, and defeat the whole purpose of expanding Medicaid.

Idahos public comment period generated thousands of responses opposing so-called work requirements. Despite the deluge of comments, Idahos Department of Health and Welfare did nothing to change its application and took only four days to review submissions before sending them on to the federal government. In other words, they ignored the overwhelming opposition to Idahos paperwork restrictions to M
To: Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services

Idahos State Legislature recently passed a law seeking to restrict access to Medicaid Expansion in our state despite the fact that 61-percent of the voters passed a clean Medicaid Expansion bill via initiative. I believe the Sec. 1115 waiver regarding so-called work requirements will penalize working Idahoans, restrict the number of otherwise eligible recipients (between 100-138% of the federal poverty level) who will receive healthcare access and create a second gap of Idahoans who will be forced to seek costly emergency room care even though they qualify for Medicaid benefits.

The purpose of Medicaid Expansion is to provide healthcare access to low-income Idahoans. Many of these people have not seen a doctor in their adult lives. Providing healthcare access to these people is going to make them more productive at work and at home, which will make their communities and our state stronger. Making these working families fill out paperwork on a regular basis puts this objective at risk.

The vast majority of people in the gap population work. As such, this restriction is not a work requirement but rather a paperwork penalty. We saw disastrous results in Arkansas where nearly 18,000 people lost coverage last year because they failed to fill out forms correctly. Nearly 90-percent of those people were still without coverage in early 2019. If you apply those same percentages to Idahos working poor, more than 21,000 Idahoans could lose coverage under this penalty for failing to fill out paperwork correctly or for not knowing about it in the first place even if they meet the so-called work requirements mandated under state law.

Because of this, Idahos paperwork restrictions will create a second gap of thousands of people who lose healthcare coverage for their failure to submit paperwork correctly/timely. As a result, they will be forced to seek expensive emergency room care. This will only increase costs to Idaho taxpayers, provide inefficient healthcare to recipients, and defeat the whole purpose of expanding Medicaid.

Idahos public comment period generated thousands of responses opposing so-called work requirements. Despite the deluge of comments, Idahos Department of Health and Welfare did nothing to change its application and took only four days to review submissions before sending them on to the federal government. In other words, they ignored the overwhelming opposition to Idahos paperwork restrictions to M
We the voters of Idaho, passed an initiative to expland Medicare for the citizens of this State. Recently, Idahos State Legislature passed a law seeking to restrict access to Medicaid Expansion in our state despite the fact that 61-percent of the voters passed a clean Medicaid Expansion bill via initiative. I believe the Sec. 1115 waiver regarding so-called work requirements will penalize working Idahoans, restrict the number of otherwise eligible recipients (between 100-138% of the federal poverty level) who will receive healthcare access and create a second gap of Idahoans who will be forced to seek costly emergency room care even though they qualify for Medicaid benefits.
1.The purpose of Medicaid Expansion is to provide healthcare access to low-income Idahoans. Many of these people have not seen a doctor in their adult lives. Providing healthcare access to these people is going to make them more productive at work and at home, which will make their communities and our state stronger. Making these working families fill out paperwork on a regular basis puts this objective at risk.
I know people in our town who have avoided seeking medical care in spite of a very real need simply because they are afraid of incurring debt. I voted for Medicare expansion precisely to make medical care available to all Idahoans.
2.The vast majority of people in the gap population work. As such, this restriction is not a work requirement but rather a paperwork penalty. We saw disastrous results in Arkansas where nearly 18,000 people lost coverage last year because they failed to fill out forms correctly. Nearly 90-percent of those people were still without coverage in early 2019. If you apply those same percentages to Idahos working poor, more than 21,000 Idahoans could lose coverage under this penalty for failing to fill out paperwork correctly or for not knowing about it in the first place even if they meet the so-called work requirements mandated under state law.
3.Because of this, Idahos paperwork restrictions will create a second gap of thousands of people who lose healthcare coverage for their failure to submit paperwork correctly/timely. As a result, they will be forced to seek expensive emergency room care. This will only increase costs to Idaho taxpayers, provide inefficient healthcare to recipients, and defeat the whole purpose of expanding Medicaid.
4.Idahos public comment period generated thousands of responses opposing so-called work requirements. Despite the
I urge you to deny the Sec. 1115 waiver regarding the work requirements restriction to Medicaid Expansion in Idaho. A clean Medicaid Expansion initiative bill was already passed by an overwhelming 61% of voters. This new restriction creates costly paperwork at the taxpayers expense, and is not even necessary because most people in the gap already work. If they dont fill out paperwork correctly or havent been notified that they need to fill it out, they will be forced to get costly emergency room care. If people can see doctors regularly, Idahoans would be healthier and more productive. Emergency room nurses say that many patients they see could have prevented their illness from turning into an emergency if they had been able to visit a doctors office in the early stages.

During Idahos public comment period thousands of Idahoans responded in opposition to the work requirements, but Idahos Department of Health and Welfare ignored the overwhelming opposition to Idahos paperwork restrictions to Medicaid Expansion. When Arkansas, Kentucky and New Hampshire ignored public comments, the restrictions got shot down in federal court. This is a waste of taxpayer money and judicial resources. Please deny this restriction to Medicaid Expansion in Idaho.

Thank you,
Diane Cissel
Boise, Idaho
To: Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services
Idahos State Legislature recently passed a law seeking to restrict access to Medicaid Expansion in our state despite the fact that 61-percent of the voters passed a clean Medicaid Expansion bill via initiative. I believe the Sec. 1115 waiver regarding so-called work requirements will penalize working Idahoans, restrict the number of otherwise eligible recipients (between 100-138% of the federal poverty level) who will receive healthcare access and create a second gap of Idahoans who will be forced to seek costly emergency room care even though they qualify for Medicaid benefits.
The purpose of Medicaid Expansion is to provide healthcare access to low-income Idahoans. Many of these people have not seen a doctor in their adult lives. Providing healthcare access to these people is going to make them more productive at work and at home, which will make their communities and our state stronger. Making these working families fill out paperwork on a regular basis puts this objective at risk.
The vast majority of people in the gap population work. As such, this restriction is not a work requirement but rather a paperwork penalty. We saw disastrous results in Arkansas where nearly 18,000 people lost coverage last year because they failed to fill out forms correctly. Nearly 90-percent of those people were still without coverage in early 2019. If you apply those same percentages to Idahos working poor, more than 21,000 Idahoans could lose coverage under this penalty for failing to fill out paperwork correctly or for not knowing about it in the first place even if they meet the so-called work requirements mandated under state law.
Because of this, Idahos paperwork restrictions will create a second gap of thousands of people who lose healthcare coverage for their failure to submit paperwork correctly/timely. As a result, they will be forced to seek expensive emergency room care. This will only increase costs to Idaho taxpayers, provide inefficient healthcare to recipients, and defeat the whole purpose of expanding Medicaid.
Idahos public comment period generated thousands of responses opposing so-called work requirements. Despite the deluge of comments, Idahos Department of Health and Welfare did nothing to change its application and took only four days to review submissions before sending them on to the federal government. In other words, they ignored the overwhelming opposition to Idahos paperwork restrictions to Medica
Despite the opposition of the Idaho legislature, voters approved Medicaid expansion for Idaho. Nevertheless, Idaho state government proposed "implementing" the will of the people by adding onerous reporting requirements designed to limit the number of people eligible for coverage. Please send them back to the drawing board and override their work reporting idea.
[Insert Comment Here]I am deeply opposed to the proposed requirements. I am also disturbed that the Idaho Legislature is not following the will of the people. Both these actions are unconscionable.

One of the biggest beneficiaries will be the poor in rural Idaho. They deserve health care and the current explosive high costs make health care out of reach.

Our legislators, who work part time, receive full coverage health care paid for by the Idaho citizens. Your lack of respect for our most vulnerable citizens is painful.
I've just spent several hours getting image diagnostic work done and noticed how many administrative people took the same information several times. I can't imagine how much extra expense it will be with waiver forms and more paper work. NO ON WORK REQUIREMENTS! [Insert Comment Here]
To: Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services

The citizens of Idaho have spoken. Recently we passed with a 61% margin a Medicaid Expansion. However, there is small minority who think we did not know what we were doing, according to them. Rest assured, we know. This minority is attempting to override the majority with a series of legislative acts including an attempt to remove voter initiative.

We voted for a clean act, and we expect a clean bill without any restrictions.
[We, the people of Idaho, voted to expand Medicaid. We knew what we were voting for. We want Medicaid expansion. We expect our representatives (YOU) to do your job and implement our will as expressed in our vote. Do your job: expand Medicaid! ]
I am writing to request that you reject the attempts of the Idaho legislature to add restrictions to the Medicaid expansion approved last year by the voters. Here are my concerns:

1- The so-called work requirements add costly paperwork and bureaucracy to the healthcare system where none needs to exist. Many, if not most, of those who are likely to gain access to healthcare through the expansion are working and should not be required to fill out extra paperwork to qualify. I am against expanding government and multiplying red tape.

2- I voted for the Medicaid expansion in order to make healthcare more accessible to the working poor of Idaho. If our legislature finds that programs to provide job training is needed, that is a separate issue entirely and should not be combined with out efforts to provide healthcare.

3- Idaho has a history of passing laws and regulations that end up in the courts and are eventually found to be unconstitutional, either under the Idaho Constitution or the Constitution of the United States or both. I, for one, am tired of using taxpayer money to pay for all this litigation. Recent court decisions regarding other states would indicate that the proposed Medicaid restrictions will be found incompatible with existing law, once again wasting Idaho's taxpayers' money.

For these reasons, and because the intent of the voters in Idaho was to provide healthcare to more of our citizens, I request that you do not approved the proposed restrictions.

Thank you for your consideration.
I am writing as a citizen of Idaho in opposition to the state's proposed Medicaid work reporting requirements.

Work requirements are extremely likely to cause thousands of Idahoans to lose their coverage, with a draconian policy of kicking people off coverage after one month of missing a deadline.

Idaho citizens have made their voices heard on this issue, but Idaho officials have ignored this public opposition. The state comment period garnered over a thousand comments that pointed out the issues with the waiver application but the state has not addressed these concerns and has not changed the application.
Idahos State Legislature recently passed a law seeking to restrict access to Medicaid Expansion in our state despite the fact that 61-percent of the voters passed the Medicaid Expansion Initative. Adding this restriction would present a barrier that many of our working poor would interpret as insurmountable. There are many people who have not seen a doctor for years and this added struggle would stop them This has been proven the case in other states that have adopted these restrictions. It would accomplish nothing positive and instead would prevent those for whom the Idaho voters passed the initiative would not receive the needed coverages. I am requesting that you rule against these unnecessary and punitive restrictions.
I oppose Idaho's work requirement proposal related to Medicaid Expansion. Idahoans voted for expansion without these poorly conceived restrictions later added by state legislators.
I am a nurse practitioner. My patients are literally dying. So many of my patients dont have the time, the financial means or the electronic capabilities to follow these arduous rules. You will only waste money implementing these rules.
Said more eloquently than I:
To: Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services
Idahos State Legislature recently passed a law seeking to restrict access to Medicaid Expansion in our state despite the fact that 61-percent of the voters passed a clean Medicaid Expansion bill via initiative. I believe the Sec. 1115 waiver regarding so-called work requirements will penalize working Idahoans, restrict the number of otherwise eligible recipients (between 100-138% of the federal poverty level) who will receive healthcare access and create a second gap of Idahoans who will be forced to seek costly emergency room care even though they qualify for Medicaid benefits.
1. The purpose of Medicaid Expansion is to provide healthcare access to low-income Idahoans. Many of these people have not seen a doctor in their adult lives. Providing healthcare access to these people is going to make them more productive at work and at home, which will make their communities and our state stronger. Making these working families fill out paperwork on a regular basis puts this objective at risk.
So many of my patients dont have the time, the financial capacity or the electronic capability to follow these arduous rules
2. The vast majority of people in the gap population work. As such, this restriction is not a work requirement but rather a paperwork penalty. We saw disastrous results in Arkansas where nearly 18,000 people lost coverage last year because they failed to fill out forms correctly. Nearly 90-percent of those people were still without coverage in early 2019. If you apply those same percentages to Idahos working poor, more than 21,000 Idahoans could lose coverage under this penalty for failing to fill out paperwork correctly or for not knowing about it in the first place even if they meet the so-called work requirements mandated under state law.
3. Because of this, Idahos paperwork restrictions will create a second gap of thousands of people who lose healthcare coverage for their failure to submit paperwork correctly/timely. As a result, they will be forced to seek expensive emergency room care. This will only increase costs to Idaho taxpayers, provide inefficient healthcare to recipients, and defeat the whole purpose of expanding Medicaid.
4
The people voted overwhelmingly for Medicaid Expansion. They did NOT vote for work requirements, etc. HONOR THE VOTE!
Requiring additional paperwork to qualify for Medicaid Expansion that other states dont require is motivated by the GOP in Idaho, who as a Political Party Obstructed for 6 years Medicaid Expansion. Medical Professionals estimated 1,000 people died unnecessarily because of Unaffordable access to healthcare.
The Hospital Emergency Room is no place to see a doctor.
Two years ago, a first cousin of mine, 67 years old died that the family are convinced he would be alive today had Medicaid Expansion been active.
My cousin worked at a 7/11 type gas station for 30 years. His employer did Not provide health insurance.
My cousin thought he had a cold, self medicated but the pain in his chest would not go away, he had to take time off from work. Eventually he realized he needed professional help, so he drove to s Local shopping mall to a Health Service Pay $250 cash per visit. The shopping mall personnel diagnosed a flu and prescribed antibiotics.
He went home.
2 days later, his wife found him Dead on the bathroom floor. His autopsies determined he did of a blood clot that moved to his heart and killed him.
I am sure, others have experienced a similar fate, no one speaks for him in the Idaho dominated GOP.
In May 2017, a GOP Healthcare Forum in Pocatello, a Candidate for Governor later Elected to Congress Fulcher stated When WE(GOP) Repeal Obamacare, WE(GOP) MAKE MONEY . Since 2014, in Town meetings, the GOP said multiple times, If Obamacare (Medicaid Expansion) comes to Idaho Waivers was a solution. I can only assume, the purpose of the Waivers was to put families at a Risk of Financial Stress, setting them up to Think they have health insurance only to be told Sorry, you did Not fill out the Paperwork or only worked 19 hours last week.
The Idaho GOP Majority wants to Keep the Federal Funds to offset the tax revenue of wealthy and corporations.
Its wrong.
To: Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services
Idahos State Legislature recently passed a law seeking to restrict access to Medicaid Expansion in our state despite the fact that 61-percent of the voters passed a clean Medicaid Expansion bill via initiative. I believe the Sec. 1115 waiver regarding so-called work requirements will penalize working Idahoans, restrict the number of otherwise eligible recipients (between 100-138% of the federal poverty level) who will receive healthcare access and create a second gap of Idahoans who will be forced to seek costly emergency room care even though they qualify for Medicaid benefits.

1. The purpose of Medicaid Expansion is to provide healthcare access to low-income Idahoans. Many of these people have not seen a doctor in their adult lives. Providing healthcare access to these people is going to make them more productive at work and at home, which will make their communities and our state stronger. Making these working families fill out paperwork on a regular basis puts this objective at risk. I myself have 3 special needs kids that require a lot of appointments and its hard to fit in work appointments and finding a sitter can be very hard to do. My husband works full time but does not make enough to afford health coverage. Adding work requirements will make it so I can not have health coverage that is needed so it can be sure to take care of my 3 kids for a long time.

2. The vast majority of people in the gap population work. As such, this restriction is not a work requirement but rather a paperwork penalty. We saw disastrous results in Arkansas where nearly 18,000 people lost coverage last year because they failed to fill out forms correctly. Nearly 90-percent of those people were still without coverage in early 2019. If you apply those same percentages to Idahos working poor, more than 21,000 Idahoans could lose coverage under this penalty for failing to fill out paperwork correctly or for not knowing about it in the first place even if they meet the so-called work requirements mandated under state law.

3. Because of this, Idahos paperwork restrictions will create a second gap of thousands of people who lose healthcare coverage for their failure to submit paperwork correctly/timely. As a result, they will be forced to seek expensive emergency room care. This will only increase costs to Idaho taxpayers, provide inefficient healthcare to recipients, and defeat the whole purpose of expanding Medicaid.

4. Idaho
I'm opposed to section1115, the work requirement proposal attached to Medicaid services It will add more unnecessary paperwork for people who are already working and create a second "gap" of Idahoans unable to access health care. It will also create additional taxes for Idahoans through more bureaucratic paperwork and the use of emergency rooms services for those who do not qualify for Medicaid. It is just a bad proposal.!
To: Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services
Idahos State Legislature recently passed a law seeking to restrict access to Medicaid Expansion in our state despite the fact that 61-percent of the voters passed a clean Medicaid Expansion bill via initiative. I strongly believe the Sec. 1115 waiver regarding so-called work requirements will penalize working Idahoans, restrict the number of otherwise eligible recipients (between 100-138% of the federal poverty level) who will receive healthcare access and create a second gap of Idahoans who will be forced to seek costly emergency room care even though they qualify for Medicaid benefits.

1.The purpose of Medicaid Expansion is to provide healthcare access to low-income Idahoans. Many of these people have not seen a doctor in their adult lives. Providing healthcare access to these people is going to make them more productive at work and at home, which will make their communities and our state stronger. Making these working families fill out paperwork on a regular basis puts this objective at risk.

2.The vast majority of people in the gap population work. As such, this restriction is not a work requirement but rather a paperwork penalty. We saw disastrous results in Arkansas where nearly 18,000 people lost coverage last year because they failed to fill out forms correctly. Nearly 90-percent of those people were still without coverage in early 2019. If you apply those same percentages to Idahos working poor, more than 21,000 Idahoans could lose coverage under this penalty for failing to fill out paperwork correctly or for not knowing about it in the first place even if they meet the so-called work requirements mandated under state law.

a.I lived in that gap for 2 years prior to retiring and it is a very scary place to be. I personally was unable to visit a health care provider when required while in this gap.

b.The low wages paid in Idaho mean most all small business retail workers and managers will fall into this gap.

3.Because of this, Idahos paperwork restrictions will create a second gap of thousands of people who lose healthcare coverage for their failure to submit paperwork correctly/timely. As a result, they will be forced to seek expensive emergency room care. This will only increase costs to Idaho taxpayers, provide inefficient healthcare to recipients, and defeat the whole purpose of expanding Medicaid.

a.There is no provision to make the paperwork available online, adding to the difficulty of tim
I live in Idaho Falls and voted for Medicaid expansion in Idaho. I do not want an expanded bureaucracy for work requirements that will limit people who need Medicaid access to medical coverage and cost money that can be used for other purposes.

Thank you for your attention

This is my second submittal with essentially the same comment because I did not receive an acknowledgement of my earlier submittal and was not sure it was received.
We asked for medicaid expansion without restrictions. Implement the expansion with no restrictions.
Idaho voters overwhelmingly supported Medicaid coverage for all those in need of it. Many of those eligible work, and the proposal would add an onerous burden on them to repeatedly prove that they work. Many of those in poverty lack the sophistication to complete paperwork, have lives of difficulty, marginal health and other upheaval. It is anticipated, by the State of Idaho, that this requirement would knock 16,000 people off the Medicaid roles. Those are the people for whom coverage is most important in enabling them to lift themselves into a better life.
Please completely reject the onerous work requirement proposed by the State of Idaho.
To: Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services

The purpose of Medicaid Expansion is to provide health care to low income Idahoans. Providing healthcare access to these people will make them more productive at work and at home. Making the requirement of filling out paperwork on a regular basis for coverage defeats the objective. They will then be forced to not seek help or go to the emergency room for help, which are more costly alternatives.
"Work requirements" have been found illegal in three states. Medicaid should provide health care, not take it away. I urge you to deny this restriction to Medicaid Expansion in the state of Idaho.
Thank you for your consideration.

Nancy Gugino, Idaho
Idahos State Legislature recently passed a law seeking to restrict access to Medicaid Expansion in our state despite the fact that 61-percent of the voters passed a clean Medicaid Expansion bill via initiative. I believe the Sec. 1115 waiver regarding so-called work requirements will penalize working Idahoans, restrict the number of otherwise eligible recipients (between 100-138% of the federal poverty level) who will receive healthcare access and create a second gap of Idahoans who will be forced to seek costly emergency room care even though they qualify for Medicaid benefits.

For the reasons set forth above, I would encourage you to deny this restriction to Medicaid Expansion in the State of Idaho. A federal judge has already done so THREE times. There is no reason to believe he will do any differently in Idahos case. Thank you for your consideration.
[Ins4. Idahos public comment period generated thousands of responses opposing so-called work requirements. Despite the deluge of comments, Idahos Department of Health and Welfare did nothing to change its application and took only four days to review submissions before sending them on to the federal government. In other words, they ignored the overwhelming opposition to Idahos paperwork restrictions to Medicaid Expansion. Weve already seen the results of government officials ignoring public comments in Arkansas, Kentucky and New Hampshire the restrictions get shot down in federal court. This is a waste of taxpayer money and judicial resources and a burden on the tens of thousands of working Idahoans who are finally getting healthcare access. ert Comment Here]

I am tired of Idaho's legislators thinking they are the experts. Most of them have no knowledge of what it is like to be a low income worker.

I am on Medicare now, but when I really needed some help, Medicaid requirements put our income, $22 over the limit to qualify for help. That is not right.
[Paperwork Restrictions New Sample Comment
To: Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services
Idahos State Legislature recently passed a law seeking to restrict access to Medicaid Expansion in our state despite the fact that 61-percent of the voters passed a clean Medicaid Expansion bill via initiative. I believe the Sec. 1115 waiver regarding so-called work requirements will penalize working Idahoans, restrict the number of otherwise eligible recipients (between 100-138% of the federal poverty level) who will receive healthcare access and create a second gap of Idahoans who will be forced to seek costly emergency room care even though they qualify for Medicaid benefits.
Most of Idahos population is extremely rural with medical facilities few and far between. People who avoid preventative care to save money often end up in remote emergency facilities where they have to be flown to larger centers. Few can ever pay for the cost of emergency care.
This past winter I had to drive my disabled brother to emergency care four times usually a night in snowstorms one and half hours away. He is lucky having been born disabled he has full coverage. But he needs an advocate as he cannot communicate well. I have to be that advocate. As such, I have had to cover hotel rooms, gas, and loss of work. I cant keep this up and if he lost even a tiny bit of his Medicaid coverage it would tank him and me, and the volunteer organizations I help and on and on.
A friend cut his finger in a snowblower and had to be driven to the same ER one and half hours away, again, in a snowstorm at night over dangerous mountain passes. I saved him the $1200 cost of an ambulance, but the loss of his finger cost him $7,000 (his deductible) and stayed home only 2 days despite the fact that he is a construction worker. It will be years before he is out that debt. He already suffers from depression and has been on suicide watch more than once.
Lack of affordable Medical care is killing us even those of us who are not the patient. There is no help. There is a horrible lack of jobs that pay even close to a living wage and one medical bill puts most of us under for years. Saving for retirement is a joke completely not possible.
Penalizing people who need medical assistance to keep themselves functioning is wildly short sighted. I dont know anyone getting Medicaid who is not working often 2 jobs. Get real!
Deny restrictions to Medicaid Expansion in the State of Idaho. A federal judge
Work requirements will hurt. They violate the central tenet of Medicaid, which is to provide health coverage, not take it away.
I am a volunteer driver for a local non-profit, COAST Transportation. I drive people who qualify to medical appointments. Many of these people would suffer greatly, some would die unnecessarily, if they did not get coverage under expanded Medicare.
In November of 2018, 61% of Idaho citizens voted FOR a Medicaid Expansion bill via initiative. Idahoans are still waiting for the Idaho State Legislature to fund Idahos small contribution to this vital bill. Instead of working to source funding, the Legislature has stalled and thrown up roadblocks in the form of work requirements. The Sec. 1115 waiver aka work requirements will penalize working Idahoans, restrict the number of otherwise eligible recipients (between 100-138% of the federal poverty level) who will receive healthcare access and create a second gap of Idahoans who will be forced to seek costly emergency room care even though they qualify for Medicaid benefits.

1.The purpose of Medicaid Expansion is to provide healthcare access to low-income Idahoans. Many of these people have not seen a doctor in their adult lives. Many have medical conditions that prohibit visits to state offices and/or lack the education, the time, and the resources to fill out paperwork on a monthly or even a quarterly basis to mollify legislators who really dont want to have to fund this healthcare program. Sick people need medical care, not more paperwork.
2.The vast majority of people in the gap population work. As such, this restriction is not a work requirement but rather a paperwork penalty. We dont want to repeat the Arkansas mistake, where nearly 18,000 people lost coverage because they failed to fill out forms correctly. Nearly 90-percent of those people were still without coverage in early 2019. If you apply those same percentages to Idahos working poor, more than 21,000 Idahoans could lose coverage under this penalty for failing to fill out paperwork correctly or for not knowing about it in the first place even if they meet the so-called work requirements mandated under state law.
3.Because of this, Idahos paperwork restrictions will create a second gap of thousands of people who lose healthcare coverage for their failure to submit paperwork correctly/timely. As a result, they will be forced to seek expensive emergency room care. This will only increase costs to Idaho taxpayers, provide inefficient healthcare to recipients, and defeat the whole purpose of expanding Medicaid.
4.Idahos public comment period generated thousands of responses opposing so-called work requirements. Despite the deluge of comments, Idahos Department of Health and Welfare did nothing to change its application and took only four days to review submissions before sending them on to the fe
Ninety-eight percent of the comments Idahoans shared with the Idaho Department of Health and Welfare opposed this waiver for obvious reasons. We voted for Medicaid Expansion that would cover the costs of health care for our fellow Idahoans who could otherwise not afford it. Our concerns were not address in the waiver that was submitted to CMS.

As someone who has benefited from medical insurance negotiated as part of my salary as a school district employee and who is now covered through Medicare and a supplemental policy, I am not interested in having my tax dollars spent on creating a bureaucracy to restrict poor peoples access to comprehensive health care. There is no easy way to administer a policy that includes cumbersome reporting requirements. This restriction will create additional time, paperwork, and therefore expense, for health care providers as well as government agencies.

There is no evidence that work requirements lead to better health outcomes. In fact, the opposite is true. Healthy people are productive workers. I certainly support job training and assistance in finding work for those who are unemployed and are able to work, but that should be a separate government effort. The purpose of Medicaid is to provide health care to those who cannot afford it. It is not designed to be a reward for those who work.
I am writing to express my concerns about proposed restrictions and cumbersome paperwork requirements the State of Idaho has placed on the Medicaid expansion rules. These will be costly and create unwarranted inefficiencies. Idaho passed medicaid expansion with 61 percent approval. It is safe to say we do not want these additional requirements placed on for implementation. Thank you for your consideration.
To: Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services
Idahos State Legislature recently passed a law seeking to restrict access to Medicaid Expansion in our state despite the fact that 61-percent of the voters passed a clean Medicaid Expansion bill via initiative. I believe the Sec. 1115 waiver regarding so-called work requirements will penalize working Idahoans, restrict the number of otherwise eligible recipients (between 100-138% of the federal poverty level) who will receive healthcare access and create a second gap of Idahoans who will be forced to seek costly emergency room care even though they qualify for Medicaid benefits.
1.The purpose of Medicaid Expansion is to provide healthcare access to low-income Idahoans. Many of these people have not seen a doctor in their adult lives. Providing healthcare access to these people is going to make them more productive at work and at home, which will make their communities and our state stronger. Making these working families fill out paperwork on a regular basis puts this objective at risk.
2.The vast majority of people in the gap population work. As such, this restriction is not a work requirement but rather a paperwork penalty. We saw disastrous results in Arkansas where nearly 18,000 people lost coverage last year because they failed to fill out forms correctly. Nearly 90-percent of those people were still without coverage in early 2019. If you apply those same percentages to Idahos working poor, more than 21,000 Idahoans could lose coverage under this penalty for failing to fill out paperwork correctly or for not knowing about it in the first place even if they meet the so-called work requirements mandated under state law.
3.Because of this, Idahos paperwork restrictions will create a second gap of thousands of people who lose healthcare coverage for their failure to submit paperwork correctly/timely. As a result, they will be forced to seek expensive emergency room care. This will only increase costs to Idaho taxpayers, provide inefficient healthcare to recipients, and defeat the whole purpose of expanding Medicaid.
4.Idahos public comment period generated thousands of responses opposing so-called work requirements. Despite the deluge of comments, Idahos Department of Health and Welfare did nothing to change its application and took only four days to review submissions before sending them on to the federal government. In other words, they ignored the overwhelming opposition to Idahos paperwork restrictions t
To: Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services
Idahos State Legislature recently passed a law seeking to restrict access to Medicaid Expansion in our state despite the fact that 61-percent of the voters passed a clean Medicaid Expansion bill via initiative. I believe the Sec. 1115 waiver regarding so-called work requirements will penalize working Idahoans, restrict the number of otherwise eligible recipients (between 100-138% of the federal poverty level) who will receive healthcare access and create a second gap of Idahoans who will be forced to seek costly emergency room care even though they qualify for Medicaid benefits.
1.The purpose of Medicaid Expansion is to provide healthcare access to low-income Idahoans. Many of these people have not seen a doctor in their adult lives. Providing healthcare access to these people is going to make them more productive at work and at home, which will make their communities and our state stronger. Making these working families fill out paperwork on a regular basis puts this objective at risk.
2.The vast majority of people in the gap population work. As such, this restriction is not a work requirement but rather a paperwork penalty. We saw disastrous results in Arkansas where nearly 18,000 people lost coverage last year because they failed to fill out forms correctly. Nearly 90-percent of those people were still without coverage in early 2019. If you apply those same percentages to Idahos working poor, more than 21,000 Idahoans could lose coverage under this penalty for failing to fill out paperwork correctly or for not knowing about it in the first place even if they meet the so-called work requirements mandated under state law.
3.Because of this, Idahos paperwork restrictions will create a second gap of thousands of people who lose healthcare coverage for their failure to submit paperwork correctly/timely. As a result, they will be forced to seek expensive emergency room care. This will only increase costs to Idaho taxpayers, provide inefficient healthcare to recipients, and defeat the whole purpose of expanding Medicaid.
4.Idahos public comment period generated thousands of responses opposing so-called work requirements. Despite the deluge of comments, Idahos Department of Health and Welfare did nothing to change its application and took only four days to review submissions before sending them on to the federal government. In other words, they ignored the overwhelming opposition to Idahos paperwork restrictions t
To: Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services
Idahos State Legislature recently passed a law seeking to restrict access to Medicaid Expansion in our state despite the fact that 61-percent of the voters passed a clean Medicaid Expansion bill via initiative. I believe the Sec. 1115 waiver regarding so-called work requirements will penalize working Idahoans, restrict the number of otherwise eligible recipients (between 100-138% of the federal poverty level) who will receive healthcare access and create a second gap of Idahoans who will be forced to seek costly emergency room care even though they qualify for Medicaid benefits.
1.The purpose of Medicaid Expansion is to provide healthcare access to low-income Idahoans. Many of these people have not seen a doctor in their adult lives. Providing healthcare access to these people is going to make them more productive at work and at home, which will make their communities and our state stronger. Making these working families fill out paperwork on a regular basis puts this objective at risk.
2.The vast majority of people in the gap population work. As such, this restriction is not a work requirement but rather a paperwork penalty. We saw disastrous results in Arkansas where nearly 18,000 people lost coverage last year because they failed to fill out forms correctly. Nearly 90-percent of those people were still without coverage in early 2019. If you apply those same percentages to Idahos working poor, more than 21,000 Idahoans could lose coverage under this penalty for failing to fill out paperwork correctly or for not knowing about it in the first place even if they meet the so-called work requirements mandated under state law.
3.Because of this, Idahos paperwork restrictions will create a second gap of thousands of people who lose healthcare coverage for their failure to submit paperwork correctly/timely. As a result, they will be forced to seek expensive emergency room care. This will only increase costs to Idaho taxpayers, provide inefficient healthcare to recipients, and defeat the whole purpose of expanding Medicaid.
4.Idahos public comment period generated thousands of responses opposing so-called work requirements. Despite the deluge of comments, Idahos Department of Health and Welfare did nothing to change its application and took only four days to review submissions before sending them on to the federal government. In other words, they ignored the overwhelming opposition to Idahos paperwork restrictions t
To: Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services

Idahos State Legislature recently passed a law seeking to restrict access to Medicaid Expansion in our state despite the fact that 61-percent of the voters passed a clean Medicaid Expansion bill via initiative. I believe the Sec. 1115 waiver regarding so-called work requirements will penalize working Idahoans, restrict the number of otherwise eligible recipients (between 100-138% of the federal poverty level) who will receive healthcare access and create a second gap of Idahoans who will be forced to seek costly emergency room care even though they qualify for Medicaid benefits.

1.The purpose of Medicaid Expansion is to provide healthcare access to low-income Idahoans. Many of these people have not seen a doctor in their adult lives. Providing healthcare access to these people is going to make them more productive at work and at home, which will make their communities and our state stronger. Making these working families fill out paperwork on a regular basis puts this objective at risk.

a.When I was an AmeriCorps VISTA volunteer, I worked very closely with low income families many who didnt know how to read or write, but were trying to better themselves for their children. As a VISTA, we helped mentor and tutor their children and provide them with support that they might not be able to get from home. Parents cant help their children do their homework if they themselves cant read or write. Through this program, I learned that many parents are trying their best with the tools and skills they have and want more opportunities for their children. Receiving proper healthcare should not be an additional obstacle they face. If families cant help their children with basic math and reading skills, how do you expect them to fill out complicated medical forms?

2.The vast majority of people in the gap population work. As such, this restriction is not a work requirement but rather a paperwork penalty. We saw disastrous results in Arkansas where nearly 18,000 people lost coverage last year because they failed to fill out forms correctly. Nearly 90-percent of those people were still without coverage in early 2019. If you apply those same percentages to Idahos working poor, more than 21,000 Idahoans could lose coverage under this penalty for failing to fill out paperwork correctly or for not knowing about it in the first place even if they meet the so-called work requirements mandated under state law.

3.Because of thi
The work requirement and resulting paperwork defeats the purpose of the Medicaid expansion. Other states have tried this and have had their requirements defeated in federal court. Such a waste of taxpayer money. Many people would be denied because of busy lives already working and because of small mistakes on the paperwork. If they lose their coverage, they will go to the more expensive emergency rooms which defeats the purpose of expanded Medicaid.
I did not vote Medicaid restrictions or work requirements on the Medicaid expansion. One, it has been shown not to work in other states, two it would disqualify to small amount of people we are trying to cover in the first place. Please listen to our votes and reject medicaid restrictions!
Please do not vote for Medicare Work Reporting Requirements in Idaho. It will prevent the people who need it most from getting the care they need, cause more bureaucracy, and create another gap and cost too much money to carry out.
To: Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services
Idahos State Legislature recently passed a law seeking to restrict access to Medicaid Expansion in our state despite the fact that 61-percent of the voters passed a clean Medicaid Expansion bill via initiative. It seems that almost 2/3s of the voters were not heard by the State Legislator. They seem to want to make it harder to keep people enrolled. I believe the Sec. 1115 waiver regarding so-called work requirements will penalize working Idahoans, restrict the number of otherwise eligible recipients (between 100-138% of the federal poverty level) who will receive healthcare access and create a second gap of Idahoans who will be forced to seek costly emergency room care even though they qualify for Medicaid benefits.
1.The purpose of Medicaid Expansion is to provide healthcare access to low-income Idahoans.. Providing healthcare access to these people is going to make them more productive at work and at home, which will make their communities and our state stronger. Making these working families fill out paperwork on a regular basis puts this objective at risk.
2.The vast majority of people in the gap population work. As such, this restriction is not a work requirement but rather a paperwork penalty. We saw disastrous results in Arkansas where nearly 18,000 people lost coverage last year because they failed to fill out forms correctly. Nearly 90-percent of those people were still without coverage in early 2019. If you apply those same percentages to Idahos working poor, more than 21,000 Idahoans could lose coverage under this penalty for failing to fill out paperwork correctly or for not knowing about it in the first place even if they meet the so-called work requirements mandated under state law.
3.Because of this, Idahos paperwork restrictions will create a second gap of thousands of people who lose healthcare coverage for their failure to submit paperwork correctly/timely. As a result, they will be forced to seek expensive emergency room care. This will only increase costs to Idaho taxpayers, provide inefficient healthcare to recipients, and defeat the whole purpose of expanding Medicaid.
4.Idahos public comment period generated thousands of responses opposing so-called work requirements. Despite the deluge of comments, Idahos Department of Health and Welfare did nothing to change its application and took only four days to review submissions before sending them on to the federal government. In other words
RE: Idaho Sec 1115 Waiver - Medicaid Expansion

Idaho passed a Medicaid Expansion bill through a ballot initiative with 61% of the vote. The bill was a "clean" bill. Now our state legislature wants to add work requirements despite what the voters overwhelming said at the polls AND during the public comment period.

Listen to the will of the people, our voters; Idahoans who believe in the Medicaid Expansion they voted for in the ballot initiative.

I encourage you to deny the restrictions to the Medicaid Expansion as presented in the Idaho Sec. 1115 Waiver. Thank you

Paula A Jones
Pocatello, Idaho
I oppose Medicaid work requirements in Idhao.
I oppose additional requirements for women's reproductive health, meant to slow down the process for these women. Both are too obstructive. Please offer Medicaid in simple straightforward way, as Idahoans voted.
It's disgusting how our Idaho legislators ignore & try to stifle input from its citizens. And they're at it again! Thank you for the opportunity to comment on the proposed Medicaid Restrictions! I still believe that there should be NO restrictions on Medicaid expansion in Idaho, just as I (and the other 60% of ID voters) did when I/we voted for the expansion.
I am part of the 61% of voters who voted for a clean medicaid expansion. Instead of listening to the voters legislators continue to add restrictions i.e., paperwork/work requirements. Why develop another bureaucracy to police the people who are least able to care for themselves?
[Insert Comment Here]This has been a long battle dating back to Obamacare. Same enemies have fought it every step of the way. Of interest, the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops, after ironing out initial objections has supported it. Then came all the state laws and, finally, state initiatives the local and regional bishops have supported all those efforts for Medicaid expansion. It's the right thing to do. stop dream up more and more obstacles. Stop refighting Obamacare just because some people still hate Obama.
When I carried a petition to put this issue on the ballot before the general population, the responses I got from the people at the doorstep were enthusiastic and they fully understood to merits and the costs of this proposal. And when the vote was counted Idahoans passed the Initiative by a resounding percentage. We don't need any waivers, limitations, extras terms, or other shenanigans to keep poor people sick or ill.
To Whom This May Concern,

I am an Idaho resident who voted for Medicare Expansion in the November election last year. There was an overwhelming approval for this measure by the residents of Idaho.

The legislature has been fighting the peoples decision tooth and nail trying to do their best to negate the peoples will.

Their latest attempt is to add a work requirement which will exclude thousands of people from getting lifesaving coverage. The majority of people in this state benefiting from this healthcare already work. But there are some less fortunate people who are not able to work because of illness or inability to find work even though they have tried.

Please dont allow these legislators to dismantle the peoples will. Allow our neighbors to receive the lifesaving care they need.

Thank you, Gail Morris
255 E Kyle Rd
Priest River, Idaho. 83856
The citizens of Idaho voted for Medicaid Health Insurance coverage for our most vulnerable neighbors. Now, our elected politicians have passed a law with work requirements. These folks make $2,000-12,000 a year, most are already working. These requirements destroy the mission of Medicaid, to insure the most vulnerable of our people. Idaho's legislature ignored thousands of comments, from their constituents, opposing this law. Who is the governments working for anyway? Thanks for you time.
Ladies and Gentlemen,

Ladies and Gentlemen,

I urge you to comply with the will of 61% of Idaho voters who want to expand health care to Idaho's working poor without any restrictions.

Our future depends on our children. Please do not compromise the health of working poor parents and their children.
To: Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services
Idahos State Legislature recently passed a law seeking to restrict access to Medicaid Expansion in our state despite the fact that 61-percent of the voters passed a clean Medicaid Expansion bill via initiative. I believe the Sec. 1115 waiver regarding so-called work requirements will penalize working Idahoans, restrict the number of otherwise eligible recipients (between 100-138% of the federal poverty level) who will receive healthcare access and create a second gap of Idahoans who will be forced to seek costly emergency room care even though they qualify for Medicaid benefits.

The voters of Idaho made it clear that we want Medicaid Expansion in our state. There is no good reason why the will of the people should be diminished.

It's simple: Its available. We want it.

I encourage you to deny this restriction to Medicaid Expansion in the State of Idaho. A federal judge has already done so THREE times. There is no reason to believe he will do any differently in Idahos case. Thank you for your consideration.
Sincerely,

Philip Riersgard
Moscow, Idaho
I oppose the work reporting requirements that the state of Idaho has put on the medicaid expansion initiative passed by Idaho voters. This will cause many people in Idaho to lose coverage because of this strict requirement. It is not in keeping with what we voted on. We need better coverage, not coverage that is harder to qualify for.
[To: Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services
Idahos State Legislature recently passed a law seeking to restrict access to Medicaid Expansion in our state despite the fact that 61-percent of the voters passed a clean Medicaid Expansion bill via initiative. I believe the Sec. 1115 waiver regarding so-called work requirements will penalize working Idahoans, restrict the number of otherwise eligible recipients (between 100-138% of the federal poverty level) from receiving healthcare access and create a second gap of Idahoans who will forego needed healthcare or seek costly emergency room care even though they qualify for Medicaid benefits.
1.The purpose of Medicaid Expansion is to provide healthcare access to low-income Idahoans. Many of these people have not seen a doctor in their adult lives. Providing healthcare access to these people is going to make them more productive at work and at home, which will make their communities and our state stronger. Making these working families fill out paperwork to deny coverage puts this objective at risk (as is the intent of vindictive legislators post initiative
2.The vast majority of people in the gap population work. As such, this restriction is not a work requirement but rather a paperwork penalty. We saw disastrous results in Arkansas where nearly 18,000 people lost coverage last year because they failed to fill out forms correctly. Nearly 90-percent of those people were still without coverage in early 2019. If you apply those same percentages to Idahos working poor, more than 21,000 Idahoans could lose coverage under this penalty for failing to fill out paperwork correctly or for not knowing about it in the first place even if they meet the so-called work requirements mandated under state law.
3.Because of this, Idahos paperwork restrictions will create a second gap of thousands of people who lose healthcare coverage for their failure to submit paperwork correctly/timely. As a result, they will be forced to seek expensive emergency room care. This will only increase costs to Idaho taxpayers, provide inefficient healthcare to recipients, and defeat the whole purpose of expanding Medicaid.
4.Idahos public comment period generated thousands of responses opposing so-called work requirements. Despite the deluge of comments, Idahos Department of Health and Welfare did nothing to change its application and took only four days to review submissions before sending them on to the federal government. In other words, they
Work requirements are designed to restrict healthcare coverage. It makes people who are too sick to work navigate a red-tape maze or lose coverage. How can this even be legal, heaven knows it isn't moral. People who are poor deserve quality healthcare too. Making people who are sick or disabled look for work is cruel.
My name is Roberta DAmico and I live in Boise, Idaho. I appreciate the opportunity to comment.

I am one of the 61% of Idahoans who voted to implement Medicaid Expansion with no restrictions. I also volunteered in the statewide effort to get the bill passed. This issue continues to be very important to me.

Idahos State Legislature recently passed a law seeking to restrict access to Medicaid Expansion in our state despite the fact that 61-percent of the voters passed a clean Medicaid Expansion bill via initiative. The Sec. 1115 waiver regarding so-called work requirements will penalize working Idahoans, restrict the number of otherwise eligible recipients (between 100-138% of the federal poverty level) who will receive healthcare access and create a second gap of Idahoans who will be forced to seek costly emergency room care even though they qualify for Medicaid benefits.

I have listened to and read about individuals who were working one or more low-income jobs, in desperate need of healthcare, yet could not afford it.

If someone is battling an illness its stressful enough, let alone to add the unnecessary documentation as proposed. Doctor appointments, tests and treatments, take up a huge amount of time. I speak from experience. While my prognosis is good, I have a brain tumor. There is already a mountain of paperwork patients like myself, have to fill out for insurance coverage, much of which is done on-line. I have good internet connectivity, which is not true for many in the state especially if they are constrained financially or in an area which doesnt have adequate WIFI.

The human pain and suffering that will be prevented is not the only reason why Medicaid Expansion, without restrictions, needs to be implemented. To be brash, there is a financial impact on the taxpayers, as ultimately, paying for preventive care is more cost effective to the taxpayers and the state.

Medicaid is not a jobs legislation, its a health care legislation. Reporting work requirements will create an extended bureaucracy, requiring more staff and funding, costing taxpayers like me money. Fiscally, its inefficient. I am befuddled as to how an added bureaucracy will enhance Governor Littles overall intent of the Red Tape Reduction Act.

There is an impact to the Federal coffers too. All this back and forth is costing me, a Federal taxpayer money.

So, there you have it. Work requirements will cause coverage loss to those in need, will require dozens of new full-ti
There should not be a work requirement for Medicaid. It was always intended to help the very poor.
As voters, we the people of Idaho, supported the Medicaid expansion in order to help and support our fellow Idaho citizens. There was no work requirements or proviso attached to our votes or our intent. To add one now is counter to the intent of the voting public when this ballot initiative passed by an overwhelming majority.
Alternatively, legislation that would streamline the process of applicants for disability benefits should be pursued, as it currently takes years for these people to receive the benefits they desperately need.
There are many, many reasons to reject the Work Requirements Waiver for Idaho:

- work requirements don't work for their intended purpose;
- work requirements cause people to lose healthcare coverage they desperately need;
- work requirements will cost Idaho money;
- work requirements will increase the size of government bureaucracy;
- work requirements will lead to more medical bankruptcies;
- work requirements are not what 61% of Idaho voters voted for.

Thank you.
10/22/19

To whom it May Concern

I am a 64 year old Idaho citizen and registered voter. I am one of many, many people in all districts in the state who have worked very hard in getting the signatures. After all the work we put in we successfully got the bill on the state ballet and it was overwhelmingly passed! Now, the past YEAR has been spent by the state legislature trying everything they can think of to stop the implementation of the bill, as well as adding sideboards to it that NEVER had a vote. Many in the legislature do not want citizen initiatives to be on our ballots so that we, the very citizens that placed these politicians in office and can also vote them OUT, are only limited to the issues that the legislature itself have authorized to be on the ballet.
Our anger is mounting. We expect full implementation of this bill WITHOUT CHANGES OR SIDEBOARDS very quickly, as a year has already passed.
Adding work requirements to Idaho's Medicaid Expansion program will increase administrative costs at the same time as it bumps people off coverage. Many entry level workers experience considerable job churning through no fault of their own. For example restaurants routinely expand their workforce during patio season or in holiday season, then downsize after these seasons are over. Job requirements will make these people sporadically ineligible for insurance, with some likely to drop out of the program for good. Let's spend our Medicaid dollars enabling access to healthcare, not wasting administrative time on arbitrary work requirements.
To Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services:
After 6 years of the Idaho legislature denying low income Idahoans who didn't meet standards to have medical benefits, 61% of Idaho voters, by use of the initative process, voted to expand unrestricted Medicaid benefits, effecting some 70,000 people.
Unfortunately, the Idaho legislative body imposed a road block with section 1115 Waiver. This is not what the voters intended. A work requirement element with a paperwork trail is needed to be completed each month or benefits will be denied. This new state system will pull money toward adminstrative costs rather than use it to expand benefits to many Idahoans who need health care. Many low income individuals don't have a computer or easily accessed computer or transportation to file paperwork each month. Temporary job situations or high rent induced moves further put up unrealistic requirements. Having worked in an revenue related job at a hospital, it was clear that low income individuals and families use a more costly ER physician as their primary practitioner. Conditions that could be treated before they became serious enough to force care became hospital admissions and that cost is bore by taxpayers among others. Unemployment due to illness further complicates the situation. With healthy workers the state benefits as these people pay taxes and can help to stabilize all members of the family with employment, housing, school attendance, ect. 21,000 Idahoans could be effected by these work requirements. In Arkansas 18,000 people lost coverage because they failed to fill out forms correctly. Even knowing these samely worded policies were not approved by federal courts, Idaho wastes energy and money to challenge laws they know they can't win, not matter how it is worded. I don't think that for the most part these people need to "learn to stand on there own feet" and really, access to basic health care show compassion and is the moral thing to do. Deny Idaho's work restrictions and allow what the voters want, unemcumbered access to health care for low income wage earners.
I continue to speak out and oppose Idaho placing any restrictions on Medicaid recipients. I do feel our legislators have ignored the will of the people and continue to do so. As a poor person who was unable to get medical insurance and necessary treatment for years, I know firsthand how it feels to live in fear of sickness. I have been chronically ill for years. The end result of my journey was to beg help of Gooding County and the state CAT fund. I make a monthly payment from my Disability check on my balance which began at over $82,000. That forever hangs over me and I will never be able to pay it off, but I am grateful for the help. I now receive Medicaid and can get the healthcare and medicine I need. My quality of life is improved by not having constant worry.
I voted for and support Medicaid clean expansion. Idahoans need help, not more hoops to jump through. When one is ill, those hoops seem insurmountable. One would always be fearful of losing coverage. How cruel. Medicaid has its own system that works, so why does Idaho wish to require more? I am livid that our voices arent being taken seriously.
Additional requirements mean more officials to oversee, additional costs and it is NOT the will of the people and is totally unnecessary. If this is allowed, what next? I believe work requirements are illegal and unrealistic. I want every Idahoan to have access to healthcare and peace of mind.
Every persons case is unique and needs to be viewed as such and ones health can change drastically in a short time. I personally know 2 young women who need medical care and go without so their kids can eat.
I do not believe our lawmakers should be allowed to meddle in this issue. They have no personal experience and cannot relate. Just another way for the haves to try to control the have nots.
I sincerely pray you will not allow these work requirements to be implemented. Thank you for listening.
This is not what we (Idahoans) voted on when we voted this into LAW. Keep the proposal we passed in tact. You (our politicians) do not know whats best for the rest of us.
[Insert Comment Here]This restriction does not affect me, but it does affect people I know who cannot work. Requiring Medicaid work restrictions is inhumane and cruel. Please do your homework and stop making people suffer!
The people of Idaho overwhelmingly supported a waiver-free Medicaid expansion for the medically-needy people of Idaho. The state legislature that proposed this (or any other!) waivers does not represent the will of the people of Idaho, and deserves to have their waiver rejected!
The voters in Idaho approved the Medicaid expansion the way it was worded, and thats the way it should be implemented. The legislature is trying hard to change it into something else. Dont let them.
daho Purposefully Ignored Public Opposition and Technical Flaws with the Proposal

Over a thousand comments pointed out problems with Idahos application during the state comment period and the state ignored these concerns and made no changes to the application.

There should be NO restrictions on Medicaid.

Stop Idaho lawmakers from not answering the call from it's citizens.
I know what the legislatures purpose is: To Keep as many as possible from using the benefit! It's just stupid & will cost us a lot more by doing this. Work requirements? Most of the people getting this already work but at a pay level that makes sure they can't get benefits. They are the ones this was passed to help. They mostly want to "punish" the people for putting legislation in place that they should have done long ago! I hope the Feds handle this as they should - rejected!
Stop the madness! Three individuals own as much wealth as half of all Americans, and the .1% own most everything else. Poor people are not the problem.

Why do Republicans, while anointing themselves "the Christian party" have so much contempt for the poor and the sick? We can afford to care for the sick if only the rich pay some taxes.
I oppose the Medicaid restrictions proposed by the state of Idaho. it will result in coverage losses, often due to missing very short deadlines, and will especially impact people with disabilities.
For many people in Adams County Idaho this requirement would mean traveling 35 to 70 miles to the closest communities where jobs are available, since there are very few here. That would also mean having a reliable vehicle which many Adams County people do not have. This would be a cruel, unnecessary requirement.
Please reject any and all waivers submitted by our state legislature. The citizens voted over 60% for the expansion but not these waivers. Please listen to our citizens. Thank you.
[Insert Comment Here]
Please disregard and restrictions to Idaho's Medicaid expansion, they will just cause more confusion to the persons in need and create income for those involved with legal interpretations of such restrictions. The medical jungle is already too difficult to navigate.
I am very opposed to adding work reporting requirements to Medicaid expansion. Such a move would add another layer of bureaucracy to obtaining health care. It will require funds that could be used for health care and make it more difficult for people with cognitive disabilities and mental health problems to follow through with the bureaucratic requirements. Most of the people who will be able to access the expanded Medicaid coverage are already working, albeit their jobs do not provide health insurance or adequate pay necessary to obtain health insurance privately or via the exchange. Please refrain from approving work requirements for Idaho's Medicaid expansion.
I oppose the the Medicaid Work Reporting Requirements in Idaho because:

Work Requirements Will Cause Massive Coverage Losses: Idahos application concedes that 16,000 could lose coverage. Idahos policy would kick people off coverage after one month of missing a deadline. True coverage losses in Idaho will likely exceed 21,000 people.

Work Requirements Could Threaten Care for Idahoans with Disabilities: Filing for an exemption is an extra hoop to jump through for Idahoans with disabilities and could result in unnecessary coverage losses that would exacerbate their health issues.

Work Requirements are Illegal: Work requirements will only hurt Idahoans, and they violate the central tenet of Medicaid, which is to provide health coverage, not take it away. That's one reason why courts found CMS approvals illegal in very similar work requirement proposals in Kentucky, Arkansas, and New Hampshire.

My son is a hardworking trade laborer and single/soul parent to 3 small children who desperately needs access to affordable healthcare without extra hoops to jump through. Their lives are tough enough as he tries to manage food insecurity, housing, utilities, and other necessities of life. The children are covered through CHIP but his own health needs go unattended because he can't afford coverage even through the state marketplace.

Sincerely,
Katrina Hoff
Please do not add a work requirement to the Idaho Medicaid expansion. We, as voters, had to implement/demand the expansion through hard work and now those few that opposed it are trying to ignore our wishes and are trying to sabotage the hard work and wishes of the majority of Idahoans.

We passed a clean Medicaid expansion, let us have this for our fellow Idahoans who have been ignored for the last few years.
Idaho lawmakers are not listening to the overwhelming voices of citizens, who passed Medicaid expansion with NO RESTRICTIONS. over a thousand people commented against these restrictions, and the state ignored our concerns, making no changes to the application. Work requirements are illegal, and will hurt Idahoans. Coverage losses in Idaho will likely exceed 21,000 if there are work requirements. People who can work, are working. I worked with students with disabilities for 34 years, and I know that filing for an exemption is an extra, unnecessary hoop for them to go through. The courts have already spoken to the illegal nature of work requirements in three other states. Please reject medicaid restrictions!
During the summer and early fall of 2018 the electorate of Idaho by a citizens' initiative voted in November 2018 to accept Medicaid Expansion by a 61% vote. The electorate did not ask for any waivers but rather approved Medicaid Expansion with no limitations/waivers. Studies show that, if Idaho is to provide medical coverage for the working poor, those dealing with behavioral health issues, and those in prison, restrictions from waivers only limit those needing health care. Further, these waivers only are a reaction by the Idaho legislature to reject to the extent possible without citizen reprisal the peoples' choice. Please accept Medicaid Expansion for all Idahoans who fell in the gap.
[I am opposed to the work reporting requirements imposed by the State of Idaho. Insert Comment Here]
Once again our state legislators are trying to over rule the will of its constituents who voted to expand Medicaid to cover more vulnerable individuals. Nothing in our vote required work as a qualifier to receive health benefits. Please do not allow a work requirement to be added to burden of our most vulnerable.
An overwhelming majority of Idaho citizens who submitted comments to our legislators did not support adding a work requirement waiver onto the Medicaid Expansion process . I urge CMS to refuse that request. Thank you.
Come on people please get Medicaid going without any restrictions. This is stupid! I know you have insurance and there are so many people in Idaho that don't and they need it. Do you want more people to die??
[Insert Comment Here]
The people of Idaho by a huge majority passed an initiative to expand Medicaid. The Legislature had dithered for years regarding expansion of Medicaid. They did nothing but dither. Citizens asked voters through an initiative to do what the legislature could not do or wouldn't do. The will of the people was clearly shown in the vote on the initiative.

After the unitive passed the legislature wanted to amend the law that the citizens of Idaho passed. What chutzpah!
Writing this email to tell you I oppose Medicaid Work Reporting requirements for the state of Idaho, and what I am furious about is the fact that the State of Idaho purposefully ignored the public opposition in the state and sent it on to the Federal Government. My main concerns are:
1. technical flaws with the proposal
2. work requirements will cause loss of coverage for needy folks.
3. my concern that work requirements could threaten care for the developmentally disabled, which would affect my family directly.
4. work requirements in other states have been found to be illegal and the fact that the state of Idaho is pursuing this anyway!
This is a terrible idea.
Tying medical coverage for the poor to a work requirement is fundamentally unconscionable. IKmposing it on the Medicaid gap coverage is equally so. Withholding medical coverage because of reporting mistakes would be the height of schadenfreude. Oppose the waiver.
The voters of Idaho voted to have Medicaid coverage for low income residents. THE State legislature was offended. They then modified the proposal to minimize it's voter desired impact. The proposal will cause coverage losses unnecessarily. threatens care for residents with disabilities, ignores public opposition and is submitting known technical flaws with in the proposal. Please reject this proposal as it is currently written.
To: Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services
Idahos State Legislature recently passed a law seeking to restrict access to Medicaid Expansion in our state despite the fact that 61-percent of the voters passed a clean Medicaid Expansion bill via initiative. I believe the Sec. 1115 waiver regarding so-called work requirements will penalize working Idahoans, restrict the number of otherwise eligible recipients (between 100-138% of the federal poverty level) who will receive healthcare access and create a second gap of Idahoans who will be forced to seek costly emergency room care even though they qualify for Medicaid benefits.
1.The purpose of Medicaid Expansion is to provide healthcare access to low-income Idahoans. Many of these people have not seen a doctor in their adult lives. Providing healthcare access to these people is going to make them more productive at work and at home, which will make their communities and our state stronger. Making these working families fill out paperwork on a regular basis puts this objective at risk.
a.First of all I voted in support of the Idaho Medicaid Expansion as it was written.
b.Secondly, the over all cost to the Idaho tax payer will ultimately be reduced because these folks, many of them for the first time, will be able to receive much needed healthcare on a routine basis at the local doc-in-the-box rather than wait until the condition is emergent and end up using the Emergency Room. Idaho Legislators have completely by-passed the will of the people by putting in the work restriction.
c.Having worked for the federal government for over 35 years, I personally am aware of how difficult it is to fill out these government documents in a manner that is acceptable to those who are just looking for a reason to deny access. Forms are either incomplete or illegible, or the individual cant answer a particular question or it is written in such an ambiguous manner, those who created the form couldnt answer it. I could go on, but I suppose I should allow you to get the point.
2.The vast majority of people in the gap population work. As such, this restriction is not a work requirement but rather a paperwork penalty. We saw disastrous results in Arkansas where nearly 18,000 people lost coverage last year because they failed to fill out forms correctly. Nearly 90-percent of those people were still without coverage in early 2019. If you apply those same percentages to Idahos working poor, more than 21,000 Idahoans could lose cov
I am strongly opposed to the addition of the work requirement restriction. Listen to the people of Idaho!
Idaho citizens voted overwhelmingly for Medicad expansion in 2018. We did not approve of the work requirements. These requirements are not what the People of Idaho voted for and are illegal. Drop these illegal requirements.
As an Idahoan I'm opposed to the state's proposal to add work reporting requirements to Medicaid. Despite 97% of the comments being opposed to this new health care restriction, the state chose to make no changes to the application and sent it to the feds for review.
The voters spoke! Please no waivers on the Medicaid Expansion law. Do not make it difficult for people who desperately need health coverage.
Please REJECT Idaho's request for a waiver to add a work requirement for Medicaid expansion. 97% of comments received by the state OPPOSED this waiver. Most people eligible for expansion ARE WORKING NOW. This waiver would add needless bureaucracy and cost. Nearly 70% of Idaho voters approved a straight-forward Medicaid expansion through a voter-initiative process. Please DO NOT APPROVE this waiver. Thank you.
I strongly oppose Medicaid Work Reporting Requirements in Idaho. I am a recently retired Nurse Practitioner and work reporting requirements will cause loss of health coverage for tens of thousands of Idahoans. I have seen what happens to people when they have no health insurance! There has been overwhelming public opposition to these!! They will only hurt Idahoans and could threaten care for our citizens with disabilities. I strongly oppose these requirements and urge you to reject them. Thank you for your consideration.
I am a registered voter and a single mom. Im on disability and Medicare. I dont have insurance for my kids to stay on while they are attending college.

I dont feel my kids or anyone else should be punished and have to work to be able to access healthcare.

I have a daughter with several autoimmune diseases that affect her ability to make a quality income. Shes trying to work and go to school. She wants to have a job that can work with her health issues. Adding work to school slows people down from graduation and the ability to contribute to society.

Help people. I dont know if anyone that is comfortable in poverty.

Help people be able to lift themselves up by receiving health care.

Please remove the work standards, but allow individuals to earn some money. It allows for financial circulation.
Its a win win.
[Insert Comment Here]
Reject Medicaid restrictions
I do not support the work requirements reporting for Idaho. I don't understand how Idaho could ignore the input from Idahoans who opposed the reporting. As I review statistics about who now gets Medicaid, I understand that most persons ARE working, osmetimes several jobs. they still qualify for Medicaid because of the poverty level.
In addition most of the those jobs are quite physical which require require health and physical stamina. some people have neither. Some are caregivers who cannot work due those the responsibilities.
I understand that the Federal Government is often out of touch with middle and lower income persons, due to their own high incomes, but the Idaho legislature should know about their citizens. There is no excuse for the legislators ignoring opposition that is realistic and valid. Thank You.
The State of Idaho legislators have ignored the peoples votes and are including work requirements in order to decrease the number of citizens eligible for Medicare...I strongly oppose this action....We, The People, voted to provide medical assistance to the citizens in our state that do not have medical insurance, and, They, The Legislators are ignoring our votes.
The work requirement the Idaho legislature wants to impose on recipients of Medicaid expansion falls way, way outside the normal reporting requirements of beneficiaries of public assistance. Do not approve these outlandish, punitive requirements.
Idaho voters spoke decisively in a grassroots ballot initiative to expand Medicaid, no strings attached. Nonetheless, and in spite of citizens' objections, the Legislature has persisted in its efforts to add stumbling blocks to healthcare for poor and vulnerable Idahoans. Please reject its application to add Medicaid work-reporting requirements. Projected loss of healthcare coverage exceeds 21,000 people. Having worked as a nurse for over 20 years, I have witnessed the consequences of people who (for worry over costs) ignore symptoms and delay medical attention to their peril, and with much higher costs, often born by hospitals, clinics, counties, and state taxpayers. Please reject Idaho's work requirement proposal.
I am a widow on SS death benefits. You forgot that I dont have taxable income but also dont have medical insurance. I also cant receive it because Idaho doesnt recognize my income as low income but also recognizes it as making to much to qualify for atate insurance. I am a gap within the gap. Not only that, but I also have 3 children with special needs and cannot work. When am I supposed to get a job so I can get medical insurance for a genetic condition I have??? You are paying more out of pocket in so many ways while I continue to not get coverage and being judged well until I explain Idaho law, then the looks are on you. Thanks for looking out for "ALL" Idaho constituents. Insert eyeroll here. Thank you for all you do. If I could just move I would, as I know that is really what this is about. Slippery slope on your way to eugenics practices and abliesm. Have a great day.
I would like to express my opposition to a so-called work requirement for those who would otherwise qualify for insurance under our Idaho Medicaid Expansion. Clearly, this requirement, while well-intended, will prevent many people who need healthcare coverage through Medicaid from getting it. The problems with reporting have shown to prevent deserving applicants from getting and/or staying on Medicaid. It is unnessary, and will be costly to administer. Let us just have Medicaid Expansion the way it was intended.

To be clear, no one in my family would benefit from Medicaid Expansion, regardless of how it is implemented. My concern is for the 17,000 people in Idaho who need it...and who don't have the background, knowledge, or tools to meet the reporting requirements.
I oppose Medicaid work reporting requirements in Idaho.

I and over a thousand other citizens sent comments expressing problems with the application. The state ignored these and made no changes. I believe then was done purposely.

The work requirements will cause citizens to lose coverage. This will primarily result from details such as missing a one month deadline.

Work requirements could cause Idahoans with disabilities to lose coverage by installing another barrier in their lives. My career was spent in work with individuals with disabilities. I know that they should not have to endure one more hinderance.

I cannot understand why anyone would stand in the way of a healthy population. This is the central point of Medicaid expansion. This is why I supported the Close the Gap initiative petition.
Insert Comment Here]I am opposed to work reporting requirements! Over 50percent of working Americans do not have health insurance as an employee benefit and private health insurance is not affordable for the average family. Placing a job requirement on low income families who are either too sick to work or cannot find a job is not a solution. Will the Government provide a job for all these people?
PLEASE REJECT ANY MEDICAL RESTRICTIONS AND PASS LEGISLATION THAT CLOSES THE MEDICAID GAP AS REFERENDUM VOTERS OVERWHELMINGLY INTENDED.
Please deny Idaho's request for a waiver to allow Medicaid work requirements. Similar requirements have been overturned in Kentucky, Arkansas, and New Hampshire, so they are not going to be allowed to go into effect anyway. In addition, it is going to cost Idaho at least $1.5 million per year to create and run a new enforcement bureaucracy to prove people. Most of these people work or are too disabled to work, so this is a completely unnecessary expenditure. Medicaid is all that keeps some people in good enough shape to work in the first place., just at low paying zero benefit jobs. This is not a good policy for Idaho taxpayers.
Please block the Medicaid Work Reporting requirements proposed by the Idaho legislature. Medicaid, by design, is supposed to provide health care, regardless of health or employment. I commented at the state level but with no effect on the legislature's application to include this work requirement. I'm asking the federal government to enforce the spirit of Medicaid and provide health care as easily as possible for all those in need. Thank you.
"[Insert Comment Here]
Medicaid without restrictions is what the Idaho voters overwhelmingly passed. Please follow the will of the voters."
"The state of Idaho has ignored it's constituents long enough! We the people of this state have vehemently expressed the need and desire for the expansion of medicaid. WE KNOW THIS WILL SAVE MONEY!! Why the state is ignoring us can only be due to corruption and the lining of pockets.
Access to Care: Work requirements are an unnecessary obstacle to care. another in a growing list of obstacles to medicaid recipients in our state. As a Mental Health provider, I know full well that the majority of people seeking this assistance would be working if they could! This is rural state with a serious lack of resources, jobs, transportation and money.
Legality: these same obstacles have been found to be illegal in other states.
Please remove the work requirements from the medicaid expansion in Idaho
Thank you,"
Work requirements go against the whole purpose of this Medicaid expansion. They will mean loss of coverage for many people. Having to file for an exemption could keep many Idahoans who need this insurance from getting it. We voted for this expansion to help Idahoans in need of health insurance, not to make it more difficult for them.
Despite a voter passed referendum AND public opposition during a state comment period, the Idaho legislature is pushing for an inefficient and costly work requirement for medicaid expansion. The referendum passed by over 60% due to the fact that the legislature ignored the public will for many years. Stand with Idaho voters and deny the waiver request.
I oppose Medicaid Work Reporting Requirements in Idaho. Our leaders purposely ignored overwhelming opposition to and technical flaws with the proposal; work requirements will cause massive coverage losses and could threaten care for Idahoans with disabilities; and they are illegal.
this is a test
"These restrictions are the result of mean-spirited patriarchal farmers who all walk the other way when less fortunate human beings need help. This application is illegal and wildly unpopular here in Idaho. These boneheads do NOT speak for the majority of Idahoans, but have a grip on power here.
Work requirements will only hurt Idahoans, and they violate the central tenet of Medicaid, which is to provide health coverage, not take it away. Courts found CMS approvals illegal in very similar work requirement proposals in Kentucky, Arkansas, and New Hampshire"
"To whom it may concern;

I am writing this email to notify you that I am against ""work requirements"" on Medicaid Expansion.

As someone who volunteers at my local food bank over 20 hours per month I would have problems proving that I do so. I don't receive a pay stub, have direct employer verification, or other forms of direct proof. That means that I would not be covered by Medicaid Expansion. I'm sure that there are many more people in my situation.

The reporting would probably be done online. Since many rural areas in Idaho do not have access to the internet, they would not be able to prove that they work. And some people would probably not be aware of the necessity of reporting this information. They would fall into another Medicaid gap.

Again, as someone who volunteers at my local food bank I can tell you that the majority of people that come in to get food are already working; making them prove it would increase the chances that they would not be able to satisfy the reporting requirements, causing them to fall into another Medicaid gap. Plus, tracking of work requirements come with an additional cost.

Please do NOT approve ""work requirements"" on Medicaid Expansion.

Lisa Loret
2293 Darah Street
Idaho Falls, Idaho
83402t Here]"
"I am opposed to restrictions on this law. I voted for this and I would like it to be implemented as it was stated. We do not need a watered down version of the coverage. These people deserve the help.

Idaho voters have spoken"
Our legislators of the state of Idaho have ignored their citizens vote to provide Medicaid services to eligible people using a work requirement to hinder people from applying for their rights to medical care. Do not allow this ploy.
"I oppose Medicaid work reporting requirements in Idaho. I foresee many problems with adding this onerous requirement to a publicly-voted-for Medicaid system in our state.
They are too restrictive and would cause thousands of people to lose coverage. Many would have to jump through unnecessary hoops to maintain coverage, such as filing for exemptions. I believe work requirements such as these are illegal--they have been found to be so in other states including Kentucky and New Hampshire."
I appreciate the political beliefs of a handful of Idaho legislators that they must treat our fellow citizens as poorly as possible to make them become responsible. They show that by insisting that education should not be funded properly. They insist that the poor among us be subjected to as many obstacles to voting as possible. As they have for many many decades, they attempt to deprive the poor of medical care so that they will feel less healthy, suffer more and be forced forego medical treatment until they have to use emergeny rooms for care, be less able to work, be less able to concenrtrate on work due to their own health issues or the health issues of their family members. The efforts of less than a hundred Idaho state legislators to override the will of 365,000 Idaho voters, a 60% majority, is just more evidence of the utter disregar for life held by those few legislators. Contrary to those callous, hate-fillled legislators, Idahoans do care about our less-fortunate citizens and insist that Idaho provide Medicaid to its less fortunate citizens without any of these dishonest restrictions. Please reject the Idaho request for work requirements.
"As you know from lawsuits challenging other states implementations of work waivers on their Medicaid expansion, approving similar waivers in Idaho will lead to lawsuits against the waivers Idaho legislators want to impose on Idahoans.

Idahoans worked hard to get the Medicaid expansion into law. The signatures needed to get the initiative approved, the canvassing to explain the initiative to Idahoans, the 61% vote to turn that initiative into law was all done by Idahoans. The added tax dollar to run the bureaucracy was not in the initiative. Added a second gap was not in the initiative. Forcing undiagnosed ill Idahoans to jump through paperwork hoops to get healthcare was not in the initiative.

Save Idaho from these added expenses, help Idahoans get the healthcare they need so they can work, dont buy into the fantasy that sick people can work before they get healthcare and work with a paper heavy bureaucracy to keep their healthcare.

Leave Idahoans Medicaid expansion as written and voted on by Idahoans.

Thank you"
This is not right. do not allow it to happen.
Please do NOT impose work requirements on Medicaid expansion in Idaho. Waste of time-waste of money- Not what we voted for.
How many times do Idaho citizens have to say it? NO to work restrictions added to Medicaid Expansion!!!!!!!!!!!!!! We voted to pass Medicaid Expansion AS IS! The Idaho Legislature is not honoring Idaho citizens votes! Please help us by honoring our votes! Thank you!
[Insert Comment Here]This law should stand as it is without the work requirements. It was overwhelmingly approved by the voters of Idaho. Volunteers worked tirelessly to gather the signatures needed to get this measure on the ballot. And it passed with a large majority. There is no question that all of the laws in place were adhered to in the process. There are so many who would be unable to get health coverage under this add on. And it would end up costing tax payers way more money to pay for the emergency care for those not covered. So many Idaho tax payers have been paying into the Medicare system without being able to benefit from their payments for far too many years already. And then there are those who would die. We have already wasted millions of dollars covering those who fall in the gap by footing the bill for emergency care that could have been avoided. Idaho tax payers have been denied access to the system they have been paying into for many years. And thousands have died because they weren't able to get preventative care. This add on is criminal and downright stupid.
"Idahos State Legislature recently passed a law seeking to restrict access to Medicaid Expansion in our state despite the fact that 61-percent of the voters passed a clean Medicaid Expansion bill via initiative. I believe the Sec. 1115 waiver being sought is flawed.
The purpose of Medicaid Expansion is to provide healthcare access to low-income Idahoans. If someone falls within this income range, they need access to healthcare and this is what we voted for. There are many people who desperately need this Medicaid coverage that I have met through my work at the school district, through my encounters with various therapy providers for my children with disabilities, through meeting other families with children with disabilities, and in my own family. All of these people I have met work, have the head of household work while they provide care for their disabled children that local daycares will not, and/or attend college and may also work part time trying to improve their long term income possibilities. Not one of these people are trying to work the system. They need healthcare so that they can in turn take care of those who depend on them. The vast majority of people in the gap population work. As such, this restriction is not a work requirement but rather a paperwork penalty that will be managed by too few people for too much money that could otherwise go toward Medicaid services. Arkansas, where my dad lives, had disastrous results where nearly 18,000 people lost coverage last year because they failed to fill out forms correctly. Nearly 90-percent of those people were still without coverage in early 2019. If you apply those same percentages to Idahos working poor, more than 21,000 Idahoans could lose coverage under this penalty for failing to fill out paperwork correctly or for not knowing about it in the first place even if they meet the so-called work requirements mandated under state law. Idaho has had issues with hoops in other implementation areas that were meant to save money but have caused more issues than they were meant to solve and cost more than saved in the last few years. An example of this is the non-emergency medical transportation through Veyo and then through MTM, well meaning but disastrous. In addition a question needed to be answered, is it a work requirement per family or will this impact our disability community where parents are already struggling to care for their children? Idahos paperwork restrictions will create a second gap of"
I am very concerned about the work requirement which my state, Idaho, is requesting with the waiver for Medicaid expansion. I voted for the Proposition 2 because I want my fellow citizens to have access to health care. I understand that even the state concedes that 16,000 otherwise eligible Idahoans will lose coverage due to the work reporting requirements. This is not only harmful to them, it is harmful to the health care system in Idaho, as people without insurance often have to seek treatment in emergency rooms. Further, since good health makes people more able to work, the work requirements seem to me counterproductive. I urge you to reject the state of Idaho's work requirements proposal.
"As a health care provider at a clinic which provides free basic services to those with low income, and currently without insurance in Idaho, I can attest to the difficulty required work reporting would be for many in this population.
Many of our clients will thankfully now be able to receive needed medical services through Medicaid. Although some who qualify for the Medicaid expansion would be able to file this paperwork, there are many more who would fall through the gaps and be dropped from coverage.
Please do not put unneeded restrictions on the critical healthcare our citizens need. The citizens of Idaho voted overwhelmingly to pass Medicaid expansion with no restrictions. It needs to move ahead without a work reporting requirement."
Please heed the will of the people of Idaho who overwhelmingly voted for a clean, UN-waivered expansion to Medicaid benefits in our state! Thank you!
"I do not support adding a work requirement to expanded Medicaid. Allow expanded Medicaid to be implemented as the voters of Idaho wish.
Thank you"
"As a resident of Idaho, I am strongly opposed to the work reporting requirement proposal for the Medicaid expansion. I have read articles (see Mother Jones, May and December 2018) that detail the inefficiencies, extra layers of bureaucracy, increased cost to states, and loss of health care coverage that has happened in other states that added the work requirement. Courts in Kentucky, Arkansas, and New Hampshire ruled that the work requirement is illegal.

Access to affordable health care is a human right, not a luxury that only working people should have. Please listen to the 1000+ people of Idaho who expressed concerns about the work requirement during the state comment period. Please do not permit Idaho to implement a Medicaid Work Requirement."
"I voted for Medicaid Expansion in Idaho. Even though this passed with a sound majority, our Idaho Legislators added a number of restrictions to Idahos application, which do not reflect the will of the people.

Some of these restrictions will negatively impact the accessibility of health care to Idahoans most in need of medical services. The work requirement waiver should not be allowed. The requirement that women are not allowed to seek family planning services from providers other than their family doctors is not fair and is discriminatory.

These restrictions will add extra administrative costs to enforce. Instead of funding health care, Medicaid funds will be supporting a new bureaucracy in Idaho. These restrictions may also be unconstitutional and will lead to lawsuits. For these reasons I urge you to reject Medicaid restrictions."
[I think Idaho should respect the will of the voters and enact expanded Medicaid without any additional requirements.
IDAHO VOTERS OVERWHELMINGLY VOTED TO EXPAND MEDCAID TO COVER THE MOST VULNERABLE IN OUR STATE. PLEASE JUST PASS THE LEGISTLATION THAT THE VOTERS WANTED RATHER THAN WITH THE LIMITATIONS THAT SOME BIG BROTHER LEGISLATORS KEEP WANTING TO IMPOSE! THE VOTERS HAVE SPOKEN, THE LEGISLATURE SHOULD LISTEN!
I make just enough money to get by, but I can't afford to pay for health insurance. This is a problem for me because I make more than the income limit so I don't qualify for medicaid health insurance...
[IWe voted for Medicaid without restrictions. If restrictions are implemented, there will be thousands of people eliminated. This is not what we voted for. Comment Here]
"Hello,
I would like to express my opinion that you should reject Idaho's Medicaid work requirement proposal. I am a community pharmacist and many of the patients I see would be hurt by this additional reporting requirement. Many of these patients are low literacy and most don't have internet access at home. This makes completion of forms difficult for them. I spend hours looking for coupons and other ways to help these people afford their medications because they don't have the ability to surf the net for themselves. Providing health care coverage is one step to breaking the chain of poverty for some families. Please reject this request. I believe it is made by a state legislature that wishes for the Affordable Care Act to fail.
Thank you for your consideration!
Anna Scholes, RPh"
No Medicaid work reporting requirements in Idaho!
"I am asking for absolutely no work requirements for Idaho citizens.
The voters have spoken time after time to say we do not support changes to the initiative we voted for."
[Medicaid restrictions are unnecessary, expensive and result in people that most need and qualify for the Expansion, lose the coverage they need. The Medicaid Expansion was meant to cover those who fell in the gap, because their income is too high to qualify for regular Medicare. Please reject these barriers to coverage. Thank you
Work requirements add onerous paperwork for state officials and Medicaid recipients. DO NOT add work requirements for Medicaid recipients in Idaho.
The 2018 referendum was clear, and Idahoans voted clearly for what they wanted. Every attempt since by the legislature is designed to nullify the vote or weaken its implementation. The federal government should disapprove any attempt by the Idaho legislature to seek exceptions to the expansion of Medicaid which voters approved. How about all the strict constructionists get back to the actual words, intent and democratic structure of the US Constitution? The federal authorities should start by denying the bald attempts by the Idaho legislature to subvert the democratic outcome of a fair, clear vote. No proposed restriction to Medicaid expansion in Idaho should be approved.
"Hello. Please reject Medicaid restrictions! When it originated we asked for insurance for the working poor, an invisible and growing population in our nation. They need healthcare, not increasing work hours. Thank you for your attention to this very important matter.
Sincerely,
Jane E Krumm
[Insert Comment Here]"
A healthy population is a productive population. Why not allow the least fortunate to have access to health care? The choice between food and medical needs will continue to place well intentioned citizens onto the streets. And tax payers will continue to share the burden, one way or the other! Insert Comment Here]
Several times a week I voluntarily drive people with limited mobility to medical appointments. Most of these individuals not only do not have reliable transportation, but also struggle with financial challenges and have no insurance or inadequate coverage. They also struggle with paperwork requirements. These proposed work requirements would be yet another hurdle for these people. Many have little or no internet access. Some cannot really read and follow instructions very well and need help that is hard to find.
[Insert Comment Here]Dear Legislators, 61% of Idahoans voted for a CLEAN Medicaid expansion bill. These waivers are nothing more than revenge bills. Youre mad you dont get to continue to ignore the thousands of people caught in the gap.We gave over 10years but you didnt care that people were uninsured. The more people are insured the better for everyone. And the veiled threat to Planned Parenthood with the waiver for referrals to receive family planning. Stay out of womens reproductive rights! Plus these waivers are going to cost Idaho taxpayers unnecessary millions. Republicans have totally lost their fiscal way!
The Idaho legislature has turned its back on the citizens of the state. More than a thousand comments pointed out problems with Idahos application during the state comment period and the state ignored these concerns and made no changes to the application. The application concedes that 16,000 could lose coverage. Idahos policy would kick people off coverage after one month of missing a deadline. True coverage losses in Idaho will likely exceed 21,000 people. The proposed work requirements could threaten care for Idahoans with disabilities. Filing for an exemption is an extra hoop to jump through for Idahoans with disabilities and could result in unnecessary coverage losses that would exacerbate their health issues. I find it amazing that our legislators assume that people who cannot afford medical insurance don't want to work. Many of the people who need Medicaid are the working poor. Please deny this application for a waiver. Thank you.
"From Cliff Elliott,
Boise, Idaho
Concerning Medicaid Work Reporting Requirements in Idaho:
Work reporting requirements for Medicaid recipients have already been found to be illegal in three states (Kentucky, Arkansas, and New Hampshire). It is pointless to approve work requiremnts in this state, when it will surely be ruled illegal. And at least 16,000 recipients will lose coverage because of these illegal requirements. Idahoans like me did not vote for work requirements, we voted to help insure the low-income wage earners. Despite over 97 percent of Idahoans making comments against these work requirements, the application was not changed one bit to reflect the will of the people of Idaho. And the people of Idaho want our low-income workers to be able to get Medicaid so our rural hospitals won't go broke, and these young families can get insurance and take care of their children. This is a bad, flawed application and what Idahoans want is being ignored. It should be rejected.
Sincerely,
Cliff Elliott"
[Insert Comment Here]The State of Idaho politicians keep wanting to add things or take things away from the folks involved in the gap. This is NOT what the people of Idaho voted for folks! Fund the program with no restrictions just like the PEOPLE voted for or why are you representing the PEOPLE ? Fully fund with no restrictions please.
Listen to your constituants and do as they want
"[I'm an RN who worked with the indigent community in Fergusson, MO. I managed a private practice. I considered treating Medicaid patients as missionary work because it cost us more to see them than we were reimbursed. And hospitals didn't fare much better. So it's no gift to providers.
But if you make employers of the indigent do paperwork required to prove hours worked, they may discriminate against such persons.
Regards,
Shawn Forseth RN, BSN"
Why do we bother to vote if our legislators do not bother to listen and follow the majority?
Leave Medicaid alone and wait one or two years to make changes where needed
"[[I'm an RN who worked with the indigent community in Fergusson, MO. I managed a private practice. I considered treating Medicaid patients as missionary work because it cost us more to see them than we were reimbursed. And hospitals didn't fare much better. So it's no gift to providers.
But if you make employers of the indigent do paperwork required to prove hours worked, they may discriminate against such persons."

Please remove the work requirements for Medicaid as currently written threatens coverage for thousands of people who should be eligible.
[Insert Comment Here]
"As a physician I strongly oppose this work requirement. People of Idaho need this coverage
Thank you,
Dr. Margaret Rosenthal"
this is a test
I don't agree with work requirements. Too many people would be left out that have disabilities. I am disabled but never applied for social security because I don't need it. If something happened to my husband or his job I would be left with chronic diseases and no help. It is my experience that if people can work they do. Punishing the people that really need the help is not fair and unusually cruel. I can't go without my medications long enough to apply for SSI or disability.
"[Insert Comment Here]
I am so upset that our elected leaders have chosen to ignore our voice and have added unnecessary and costly restrictions to our Medicaid expansion. People are struggling with illness and injury that will now be forced to (try to) jump over more hurdles to get the help that they need. Its no wonder that the suicide rate keeps growing. We end up spending more money to inflict more suffering. Heartbreaking."
I, and thousands of other Idahoans opposed the state's proposal to add work reporting requirements to Medicaid. There is NO public support for a work requirement for Medicaid expansion in Idaho. Idahoans just want the health care they voted for. Medicaid should provide health care, not mandate work employment. This new rule VIOLATES the CENTRAL tenet of Medicaid which is to provide health care, not take it away from Idaho citizens who qualify for this benefit. Please help to hear the voices of Idaho citizens who voted for Medicaid expansion when our legislators failed to act.
"[Insert Comment Here]
I am so upset that our elected leaders have chosen to ignore our voice and have added unnecessary and costly restrictions to our Medicaid expansion. People are struggling with illness and injury that will now be forced to (try to) jump over more hurdles to get the help that they need. Its no wonder that the suicide rate keeps growing. We end up spending more money to inflict more suffering. Heartbreaking."
I oppose Idaho's request for a federal waiver on Medicaid Expansion to add work reporting requirements. I live in Idaho Falls and helped collect petitions for the successful Medicaid Expansion ballot initiative. I am also a physical therapist working with Idahoans who would be unable to meet the requirements if this waiver were granted. I know many people who have interruptions in work due to health problems and who would not be able to keep up with the paperwork for reporting, so would lose coverage gained through expansion. People need health care to be able to work, not vice versa. Please refuse to grant this waiver to Idaho.
Without your health, you have nothing at all. Those who struggle financially, physically, and emotionally to such a degree that their income will not support health care seem to me to be those most in need. It could be argued that people in these circumstances NEED healthcare to address their struggles if they are ever going to be more self sufficient. Many of these people do not live orderly lives in the middle class sense. It affects their work ability, work schedule, and their ability to organize their lives. A work requirement is more an effort to punish those whose functioning is compromised. It also sets up an expensive and unwieldy bureaucracy. From the state, it guarantees unreliability and an inability to competently and fairly manage the requirement. Do not grant the work requirement waiver.
The American catch 22 is that you need to have a job to get health benefits. But if you're sick, you may have a hard time keeping a job. Let's not impose this hardship on people. It's not fair or humane.
I am a registered Republican and the work requirement is shortsighted. It would cost more to administer than it could possibly save. Lets focus on efficiency please.
I am opposed to the Idaho legislature's work requirement waiver request. I am a practicing Family Physician in a FQHC in Idaho and serve many who would fall under this burdensome addition to the Medicaid program. I see regularly that many will not be able, through their lack of internet access, lack of ability to document their efforts, or basic frustration with this burden will lose medical coverage. This is not compatible with the goals of the Medicare Act. I urge you to reject this waiver request.
It concerns me that Idaho ignored the thousand comments against adding work requirements to Medicaid. Idaho characterized comments as a mixed reaction of support and opposition, when only 30 comments out of a thousand were in opposition. Idaho has a strike one and you are out if one deadline is missed for doing the paperwork to show compliance. Arkansas had three strikes. Up to 1/3 of Medicaid recipients could lose their coverage with this requirement because of difficulty in filling out the paperwork. After losing their health coverage they can soon become unhealthy or not be able to afford medicine. They can easily lose their employment. Medicaid will become much more expensive for the state of Idaho with the work reporting requirements and a second gap will be created.
My biggest reasoning for not being able to work is my health. With these restrictions, I am still not able to work due to no insurance. I have kidney disease and other medical conditions that need to be treated by specialists. Most of them won't even see me unless I pay a large amount of money up front. If I were able to get on Medicaid and could get my issues controlled or eliminated, then I could find employment. We voted for Medicaid expansion without restriction. Please give the people what we voted for.
I an a voter who voted to approve the Medicare expansion. I disagree with all of the sideboards placed on the expansion by the legislature. All of these sideboards add cost for no real benefit. I am firmly opposed to all of the sideboards. Our elected officials failed to listen to all of the testimony from many groups who are experts and the vast marjory of the citizen testimony. The citizens do not want these additional requirements.
I oppose work requirements for Idahos Medicaid expansion. They have been costly and ineffective in the states that have implemented them, not to mention illegal.
"The Work requirement exemption is not a valid solution for Idaho. The is a farce intended to mask the intent of the legislature to deny health care to millions in direct opposition to the will of the voters. They move the burden on to the populace knowing this leads to less coverage for populations they deem undeserving (Disabilities).

Deny Idaho this exemption."
While the Idaho legislature wishes to ignore the will of the citizens' initiative by adding unwanted waivers as punishment to the Medical Expansion initiative passed last November, we wish the Feds to not accept these waivers that actually punish the state of Idaho and leave thousands of individuals in the health care gap and not enrolled in Medicaid Expansion. These waivers, work requirements and family planning punish rather than help both the state and its residents.
Please look at the research which shows most employable individuals are working who receive Medicaid benefits. Adding work requirements only make it so less people will be able to have health coverage. Less people with health coverage leads to more costly emergency room visits and more money spent on the long run.
Instituting work requirements for people on Medicaid has been proven to be a problem as those who miss paperwork deadlines are likely to lose their coverage. Work requirements have also been overturned in court cases in other states. I urge you to insist there be no work requirements for Idahoans to receive Medicaid assistance.
Work requirements should not be part of this act. This would defeat the purpose of providing coverage to many Idaho residents.
Reject Medicaid Restrictions
I am retired and don't make enough on my social security allotment to buy food or gas. We voted to expand Medicaid and after working and paying taxes for 55 years you want me to sign up for work to pay my medical bills? It's illegal and outrageous. Gayla Bullock
[Those of us who work with homeless citizens know that many in this community have disabilities. A request that is a quid quo pro requirement to qualify for necessary help to survive life on our streets is immoral. It is this reason that I oppose the Medicaid Work Reporting requirement that is proposed. Work requirements will only hurt Idahoans especially the homeless and they violate the central tenet of Medicaid.

this is a test
Please see attached comments from the American Medical Association. Thank you. Debra Cohn Senior Washington Counsel
Our State can not afford to not have a work requirement in place. As a pharmacist i witnessed a large number of able bodied individuals scam the system because "they dont like to work". Free money and services create a culture of individuals spending their time trying to harvest benefits rather than pursuing something productive like work. Please keep vigorous and meaniful work requiements in place for Idaho.
The citizens of Idaho have spoken loudly and clearly: we want health care to be affordable, and we DON'T think excess paperwork and bureaucracy are the way to do it. Unfortunately, some of our elected (!) officials disagree, and they are trying very hard to encumber the process. WE WANT THEM STOPPED!
Please eliminate the work requirements for Medicaid.
I am very OPPOSED to MEDICAID restrictions that will prevent people in the state of Idaho from getting medical coverage. Despite working my son was unable to get insurance because he didn't make enough money to qualify for affordable care act insurance in Idaho. We need to close the gap for the citizens of our state with NO restrictions on access. Please help our most vulnerable & lower income citizens.
Please do not go against the votes decision concerning the health care for low income people of Idaho. You were elected to represent the state of Idaho. The people have voted so please act out the voters wishes.
I appose Idahos proposed work requirement waiver because it would impede access to healthcare for a population of people who desperately need easy access to healthcare. These work requirements would put an unnecessary burden on people who need the support of access to healthcare.
"Please reject Medicaid restrictions- I OPPOSE the medicaid work reporting requirements in Idaho.

Work Requirements Will Cause Massive Coverage Losses
Idahos application concedes that 16,000 could lose coverage. Idahos policy would kick people off coverage after one month of missing a deadline. True coverage losses in Idaho will likely exceed 21,000 people.

Work Requirements Could Threaten Care for Idahoans with Disabilities
Filing for an exemption is an extra hoop to jump through for Idahoans with disabilities and could result in unnecessary coverage losses that would exacerbate their health issues.
Thank you."
Please be respectful of the Idaho voters and, CLOSE THE GAP!
"These add-on restrictions to people who need the help the most is a travesty! The State didn't put additional burdens, or traps to loose the benefit to the wealthiest individuals!

The rich are getting richer, and the poor are getting poorer. But the poor don't have teams of lobbyists to work on their behalf.

For the love of God, insurance is vital. Help these people in need."
I cannot get affordable health insurance here in Idaho and was not allowed ACA either. I farm and irrigate and there is no way I can afford it on my own in this line of work! I am at a make or break point! It is MY right of LIFE, liberty, and happiness and it has been taken away while I grow food for the country! It is not fair. Thank you for any caring and compassion you can muster up in this area.
[Insert Comment Here]
[Insert Comment Here] The Medicaid work requirements will create more bureaucracy without adding to health care security. I am an elderly person with time to volunteer for various community organizations which help those in need. I have witnessed the many (mostly women) who perform unpaid care giving help to spouses, handicapped children, the mentally ill, and others left behind by our society. These deserving persons do not need to have the added burden of work requirements and reporting hassles. Idaho voted for health care for those in poverty. Our politicians are trying to thwart our efforts to make a fair society for all.
Please disallow this constriction to healthcare delivery, extra complicated bureaucracy and greatly added wasteful expense.
I oppose restrictions on medicaid expansion as they are illegal and are in opposition to the will of the citizens of Idaho. This is what the GOP does here: when they lose, they change the rules.
I don't agree that "work requirements" are necessary for Medicaid Expansion. I will continue to disagree with the proposal, and with all my energy, continue to campaign against Legislators and candidates that do.
"[Insert Comment Here]I am writing to oppose Medicaid work requirements in Idaho. Our Medicaid expansion will bring coverage to the ""gap"" population, and they deserve the same health care as regular Medicaid. Many of the people I know who would fall into the gap have low-wage jobs with hours they cannot control. Requiring them to work 20 hours or lose their health coverage is unfair. And when they lose Medicaid, they become costs to the counties once again, driving up property taxes. We all pay when people are uninsured, so we should be keeping people on insurance, not finding excuses to kick them off.

In addition, I object to the new bureaucratic costs that would be incurred to enforce this requirement. Our money can be better spent on health care. Other states have incurred huge costs for this bureaucracy."
"I am a long-time Idaho resident, and I oppose Idaho's request for a 1115 Waiver to permit work requirements.

If granted, Idaho's request will undermine the fundamental goal of Medicaid: to meet the medical needs of those whom Congress has prescribed.

I have volunteered many hours here in Idaho with the Society of St. Vincent de Paul. I know this population.

The complexity of work reporting alone will defeat citizens whose daily lives are often in crisis: Tens of thousands will lose coverage, healthcare costs for all citizens will grow, and state taxes will be diverted to support a large investigation and enforcement bureaucracy, and, of course, litigation.

And that is not all. I visit struggling people in their homes with the Society. I have seen Idahoans who cannot work because of an untreated illness or injury. They cannot get proper treatment because they are uninsured. The complex challenge of work requirements will keep many of them from getting both work and Medicaid.

Many who want to repeal Medicaid altogether favor work requirements: Work requirements destroy Medicaid person by person.

Those subvert the purpose of providing medical care for those whose income qualifies them.

Thank you.

[Insert Comment Here]"
"To whom this may concern;
When Idahoans overwhelmingly voted for Medicaid expansion, they did not vote for work requirements. Having sat through two months of hearings at the legislature and countless testimony, 99% of the testimony was the burden work requirements would out on an already compromised population. The legislature ignored the voters and those who took the time to testify to impose work requirements which will create a bureaucracy to enforce them, kick vulnerable Idahoans off of Medicaid and achieve no discernable goal other than then a political win for some legislators. Medicaid was meant to provide health care not impose onerous requirements. Many of these people are working, or have temp jobs, or seasonal work or caring for someone with illnesses and disabilities. Lets not impose any more hardship on these people."
"**DO NOT ADD A WORK REQUIREMENT TO IDAHO'S MEDICAID EXPANSION PROGRAM.**

Idahoans voted NO to this requirement.

This provision cuts into available medical funding. It is wasteful to use federal medical funds to monitor this provision (in hiring staff, office space, phone equipment, computers and programs, mailing letters, reviewing cases, etc.), rather than putting those funds toward actual medical care costs.

Further, many businesses, including where I workfor the State of Idahohave limited my work schedule to 19 hours a week. Idaho has already disqualified me, a state employee.

Idahoans already want to, and need to, work to survive. This provision will serve to cancel coverage when people need it the most: when they are sick and cannot work.

Idaho is an at-will state. People get fired all the time for NO reason. This provision gives an employer too much power over employee's private lives because an employee is subject to loosing a job AND healthcare at the whim of an employer.

The State of Idaho is only adding this requirement because of politics. Idaho legislatures have fought against permitting its own citizens access to these federal funds for many, many years. This is provision is a pride provision and contrary to actually helping Idahoans. The same legislatures who fight against Medicaid expansion are the same legislatures who have government backed healthcare coverage themselves.

As it is, Idahos working class has been denied access to much needed medical care causing bankruptcies, prolonged injuries (because of putting off going to a doctor), and even death from lack of access to medicine(s).

Please join Idahoans in rejecting this work requirement. We are counting on you!"
The voters of Idaho passed Medicaid Expansion without waivers. The average tax payer in this state already pays for healthcare of the uninsured through local and state taxes to support the medical indigent program, but most of this funding is for emergencies. One goal of Medicaid expansion was to provide preventative healthcare to the same demographics at a much lower cost to the taxpayer. If those who would otherwise qualify for the expansion have to go through these extra hoops, those who dont will land right back in the ER with a bill to the tax payers at a much higher rate, than if that same person had access to preventive care and/or early detection. The Waivers are nothing but a stunt of the controlling party, who are retaliating against the voters of the state who had the audacity to take this matter out of their hands. Idaho already has the money for this (millennial fund) without any need to tax Idahoans in any other way. Save us from the abuse of power from the controlling political party of this state.
[Many of us are single parents and taking care of our special needs kids is a full time job. I have five girls all with adhd and four have autism. I became a single parent by choice as my soon to be x husband wouldnt face his own addictions and mental health issues. I also am in college part time. For me thier isnt a way to fit a job in with 20 plus appointments for my girls every week. Yet I need Medicaid to keep me healthy as a mom. Those who think a job should be a requirement fail to know what it is like to walk a day in the shoes of a parent with special needs kids.
Please deny the work requirements waiver. It will add cost for no purpose but to strip people of healthcare coverage. This is not what Medicaid is for.
No Medicaid Restrictions, no more Corruption... we the people of Idaho voted for Medicaid expansion no restrictions. It should be illegal for politician to be changing what the people voted for.
I oppose Medicaid Work Reporting Requirements for Idaho. This applications does not reflect the intent of Idahoans when they passed a voter initiative in favor of Medicaid. This is likely to result in loss of coverage/denial of coverage for many Idahoans who are already struggling. It will incur unnecessary costs and red tape. Why approve work requirements for Idaho when they have already been found illegal in other states.
"I am writing to ask you to deny Idaho's request to add work requirements to its recently passed Medicaid expansion. During the public comment period in Idaho, the public shared its concerns with the proposed work requirements in large numbers. The State ignored those comments, demonstrating a lack of responsiveness to citizen concerns. The newly passed Medicaid expansion has the potential to provide coverage to thousands of Idahoans struggling to make ends meet, but the work requirements will effectively pull coverage away again from an estimated 16,000-21,000 people, greatly reducing the positive impact of expansion.

Please do not approve Idaho's request to add work requirements--it is detrimental to the most vulnerable Idahoans and goes against the spirit of the voter approved Medicaid expansion in Idaho."
Please deny the work requirements waiver. It will add cost for no purpose but to strip people of healthcare coverage. This is not what Medicaid is for.
Work requirements are a costly administrative burden that provides no benefit. It will result in lost coverage and will do nothing to enable people to find meaningful work. The work requirement waiver should not be granted because it exceeds the authority of CMS.
Please disallow these dangerous, discriminating and illegal work requirements for Idaho Medicaid. The state of Idaho already makes it very difficult to get Medicaid at this time. For adults, as soon as the family earns more than approximately 400.00/month, they are kicked off Medicaid.
"Please deny Idaho's request to impose Medicaid work requirements. Work requirements will penalize Idahoans who need healthcare, but are unable to work for any number of reasons, including mental health issues, short term injuries, family illness, and more. It will impose needless costs and bureaucracy. This waiver does not reflect the will of Idahoans when they passed an initiative to approve Medicaid.

Thank you."
"I worked as a Registered Nurse in Family Practice for twenty five years. I am strongly opposed to adding any barriers for Medicaid expansion. The work requirements will just make life more difficult for people who are already struggling plus add an necessary layer of bureaucracy.
I adamantly oppose requiring family physicians to make referrals to family planning clinics. This creates additional burdens for physicians and puts up needless barriers for people seeking health care.
Idaho citizens voted to expand Medicaid. Our representatives need to do their job.
Vicki Baukol, RN [Insert Comment Here]"
This is a duplication for a large percentage of those who would qualify. They already have work finding/reporting requirements for food stamps. Why is the state requiring an expensive new system to duplicate what is already there? Is it that hard to help your neighbor without strings attached and actually trust them to do the best they can as you do?
"As you know from lawsuits challenging other states implementations of work waivers on their Medicaid expansion, approving similar waivers in Idaho will lead to lawsuits against the waivers Idaho legislators want to impose on Idahoans.

Idahoans worked hard to get the Medicaid expansion into law. The signatures needed to get the initiative approved, the canvassing to explain the initiative to Idahoans, the 61% vote to turn that initiative into law was all done by Idahoans. The added tax dollar to run the bureaucracy was not in the initiative. Added a second gap was not in the initiative. Forcing undiagnosed ill Idahoans to jump through paperwork hoops to get healthcare was not in the initiative.

Save Idaho from these added expenses, help Idahoans get the healthcare they need so they can work, dont buy into the fantasy that sick people can work before they get healthcare and work with a paper heavy bureaucracy to keep their healthcare.

Leave Idahoans Medicaid expansion as written and voted on by Idahoans."
The people of Idaho spoke clearly on the ballet referendum concerning medicaid services. Yet our legislature ignore the voters wishes once again. They passed a proposal,containing technical flaws that one cause multiple people to loss health care coverage. The people of Idaho are going to pay one way or another for that health care. Idaho's leaders need to quit ignoring the majority of what its citizens wanted. They lawyers will make money fighting the work requirements in court that were already found to be illegal in three other states. Why spend the money on lawyers. Give the people of Idaho who need the coverage the coverage its citizens voted for. ]
I oppose ANY requirement, including work and family planning, that restricts Medicaid in any manner. The State of Idaho Department of Labor did a study just a couple of years ago that shows that 42% of Idaho is in the "digital divide", which means they do not have access to technology, including computers & Internet, so would be wrongly removed from Medicaid simply because they have no means to meet the work reporting requirement. This is ridiculous and based entirely on a political bias, not reality, facts, or finances. It will cost the state millions of dollars to TRY to implement work reporting requirements, which will likely be denied in court as it has been in Arkansas. Please do NOT allow work requirements as a means for Idaho's legislators to deny access to MUCH needed health care, especially for rural Idahoans. I run a free medical clinic in Lewiston, ID, and I know first-hand how seriously access to health care for low-income, medically needy is. Please: do not let our legislators play politics with people's lives.
I support the Idaho Medicaid work requirements. Thank you.
I am a family physician in Idaho working in a Federally Qualified Health Center, which means that the current Medicaid Expansion directly affects many of my patients. We work with a variety of local and federal programs to try to reduce costs for our uninsured patients, offering sliding scale fees for clinic visits, lab work, imaging, and prescriptions. I consider a $5 charge pretty minimal, but it was too much for a patient we saw yesterday. He was suffering a COPD exacerbation but had run out of his inhalers and couldn't afford even a $5 fee for a refill. We dispensed a sample inhaler so that we could ensure he would have the necessary medication and, hopefully, not end up hospitalized for this COPD exacerbation. We did not want the want of a nail to lose the war. Adding onerous, monthly paperwork requirements for our patients who struggle monthly to pay their bills simply creates another barrier for them to obtain healthcare - while the administrative burden of managing such a system simply robs funding from our patients. It is not news to anyone that preventative care - regular wellness visits, counselling for smoking cessation, cancer screening, etc. - saves overall costs to the system, which is why many insurances now require these services. Why are we even contemplating a system which prevents more people from having access to primary preventative care?
I oppose work requirements for Medicaid. This obstacle only makes it more difficult for people with disabilities to get the services they need. Medicaid is vital for the wellbeing of thousands in Idaho and this added paperwork is not a solution to finding employment for anyone.
I oppose work requirements for Medicaid. This obstacle only makes it more difficult for people with disabilities to get the services they need. Medicaid is vital for the wellbeing of thousands in Idaho and this added paperwork is not a solution to finding employment for anyone.
I oppose any work requirement added by the Idaho legislature to the Medicaid expansion law passed by the citizens. Enforcing work requirements would require a whole bureaucracy and a lot of staff expense to catch people who are sick. And, if a person is too sick to work, shouldnt we ensure they have medical care so they can resume work? Work requirements are needless and cruel.
"Work requirements will cost Idaho more than it will save.

I understand that 16,000 fewer people would be covered by Medicaid if work requirements are imposed. Those 16,000 unfortunate persons will be treated by local hospitals, but only after their illness has become so advanced that it warrants emergency care. This type of care, in the long run, is more expensive than routine and preventative treatment.

Medicaid treatment, on the other hand, is more cost effective and, because the bulk of Medicaid costs are borne by the federal government, also much cheaper for the taxpayers in Idaho."
I oppose Medicaid work reporting requirements in Idaho. These requirements have been found to be illegal in other states. These requirements don't work.
I oppose Idaho's proposed work requirement waiver in connection with the Medicaid Expansion approved by Idaho voters. This proposed waiver is a thinly veiled, spiteful attempt by the Idaho Legislature to undercut results of the 2018 referendum. Furthermore, it would present an additional, confusing burden for disabled Idahoans. Although I am retired and covered by Medicare, I am partially disabled myself and have considerable sympathy for others who are physically impaired.
I oppose work requirements for those on Medicaid. This requirement only adds another obstacle for people with disabilities to get the services they need. Thousands really on Medicaid, including Idaho, and adding this barrier to care is no solution to finding employment for anyone, and creates another layer of red tape.
"Please oppose barriers to Medicaid, like work requirements. Medicaid is a crucial source of coverage for people with CF. Over 30% of people in the state of Idaho with CF rely on Medicaid for some or all of their health care needs. In addition, hospitals and CF care centers rely on Medicaid as an essential source of funding. In addition to the administrative burden on individuals with CF, these proposals would create additional administrative complexity and costs for states as they will have to devote more of their staff and resources to verify and document compliance and exemptions with these policies. Without comprehensive health insurance, people with CF are more likely to have interruptions and delays in treatment and care, which can have serious short-term and long-term impacts on overall health. Any loss or gap in coverage may put people with CF at risk of declining health.

Implementing a coverage limit or lockout period for people with a life-threatening condition, like CF, because they were unable to satisfy work requirements, obtain an exemption, or meet premium payments, is excessively punitive. It also prioritizes spending cuts to Medicaid over people's health and well-being.

Please reject Medicaid Work Reporting Requirements!"
Please NO restrictions.
Please regect Medicaid restrictions!
"I oppose Medicaid work reporting requirements in Idaho. Idaho has ignored comments made by the public pointing our problems. Implementation of this will cause a large number of people to lose coverage, and create an unreasonable burden for filing for those with health or disability conditions.

The courts have found CMS approvals illegal for similar requirements in other states, and violate the goal of Medicaid to provide health coverage.

Thank you."
People need assistance, not illegal and unecessary work requirements. Even the State of Idaho's own application admits that 16,000 will lose coverage. This is heartless. We already know that these requirements are illegal. Approving them will amount to throwing away more taxepayer funds. Thank you.
[Insert Comment Please no requirements on Medicaid expansion no work ones or any others. Let's take care of out small hospitals and our citizens
It is not necessary to have more Medicaid restrictions. The voters of Idaho have voted, have testified, have marched, and know what they want.
Attempts to add work requirements have already been struck down by the courts as illegal. Making this proposal both illegal and immoral. People will die if this policy goes through. The people of Idaho have been clear. We knew what we were voting for when we voted for Medicaid expansion. We want our low income neighbors to have access to care without regard to their ability to work or, complete paperwork in a timely fashion.
Sigh. I carried petitions, I canvassed, I phone-banked and I (and the 1000 other volunteers) succeeded in forcing the Idaho legislature, via constitutionally allowed means) to finally get off its duff and expand Medicaid eligibility. Now, they want to approach the eligibility question of 10's of thousands of currently uninsured citizens by placing work restrictions and placing deadlines (with no clear means of communicating with those being affected) that could mean--by their own estimate--the potential loss of vital coverage to more than 16,000. Governor-appointed committees have studied this situation over 6 years prior to the passage of the mandate. Please don't allow or encourage them to delay or deny coverage by placing hurdles in the paths of those who need this health coverage.
Leave Medicaid expansion alone. No work requirements!
I oppose work requirements for Medicaid. This obstacle only makes it more difficult for people with disabilities, like my two adult children with cystic fibrosis, to get the services they need. Medicaid is vital for the wellbeing of thousands of actual human beings in Idaho, and this added paperwork is not a solution to finding employment for anyone.
Medicaid expansion should lift a burden from people's shoulders not add one.

The Center for Law and Social Policy (CLASP) submits the following comments in response to Idaho's Section 1115 Medicaid Waiver Demonstration Project Application and raises serious concerns about the effects of the waiver, as proposed, on the coverage and health outcomes of low-income Medicaid beneficiaries in Idaho.
"[Insert Comment Here]
No work requirement please. It will not work in Idaho as it has also not worked in several states."
I am opposed to the Work Requirement/Work Reporting Requirement purposed for the state's Medicaid Expansion. This will leave those who need coverage the most without coverage. Employment is never guaranteed. Those who live in the more rural parts of our state who cannot gain sustainable employment that offers a livable wage or those that are chronically unemployed will continue to not have access to medical care. This not only affects the health and financial stability of the individual due to the high medical costs for self payment, but effects our communities by increasing health risks from untreated communicable diseases. It also increases the burden on nonprofit and social service agencies that assist these individuals. The health of Idaho's citizens should be of the utmost importance in order to have healthy productive communities.
"Thank you for the opportunity to comment on Idahos Section 1115 Medicaid waiver proposal. In November 2018, 61% of Idahoans voted for a clean Medicaid expansion, which would provide health coverage to as many as 90,000 low-income Idahoans. During the 2019 legislative session, Empower Idaho hoped to see clean implementation of the voters will and expand Medicaid coverage without restriction. We ask that you reject the State's application to add work requirements as a condition of Medicaid expansion eligibility because it will harm Idahoans by likely causing coverage losses of as many as 21,000 individuals or more while causing others to forego needed care.

Empower Idaho provides public education and advocacy for adults with behavioral health conditions and the providers who care for them. We are trying to change the conversation of behavioral health in our state to one of understanding and compassion. In particular, work reporting requirements will have adverse effects on the adult behavioral health population due to the unique needs of this group. Adults with behavioral health conditions require consistent access to care in order to successfully manage their symptoms. When regular care, including access to psychotropic medication and counseling, is disrupted due to potential errors in work reporting on behalf of the patient, the ability to work is then directly threatened. It is essential to adults with behavioral health conditions to access regular care in order to sustain the demands of consistent employment. Without care, these patients could experience an episode of psychosis that impairs their functionality and may impede their ability to attend work, perform adequately, or healthfully cope with increased work-related stress. When this situation occurs, it is of greater concern to access care again as soon as possible. Requiring the additional task of demonstrating their work hours is placing undue burden on an individual whose compromised energy is better served addressing their most immediate need.

Work reporting requirements have been shown to create confusing bureaucratic hoops that are difficult for beneficiaries to navigate, which cause eligible people, like Idahoans with behavioral health conditions who would qualify for exemptions, to lose coverage. These proposed rules also unnecessarily grow government and waste taxpayer dollars. Were concerned that these requirements would create an expensive secondary coverage gap of uninsured Idahoans"
I oppose Medicaid work requirements in Idaho, it will only hurt Idahoans, and work requirements are illegal & violate the basic tenet of Medicaid to provide healthcare not take it away.
"Please deny Idaho's application for a waiver regarding work reporting requirements.
The reporting will make it very difficult for part-time and seasonal workers to maintain their coverage in the gaps between their employment--often when they need it the most.
The requirements are inconsistent with the goals of the Medicaid program."
"Idaho Purposefully Ignored Public Opposition and Technical Flaws with the Proposal. Work Requirements Will Cause Massive Coverage Losses with as many as 21,000 individuals losing coverage due to these requirements!

Please do not allow this to happen!"
This goes against what the majority of Idaho voters voted for. Just remember, there is always another election on the horizon and we, the voters, have a good memory for names!
"I am writing in opposition to the work reporting requirements requested by the Idaho Legislature as part of the Medicaid expansion. These work requirements were not what the 61% of Idahoans voted for last November. We wanted our citizens in need to have health care with no more additional hoops to jump through. Having the work requirements would stop some people from signing up, would create problems for Idahoans with disabilities and was deemed illegal in three other states.
Do not approve these requirements and tell Idaho to listen to what the voters and all of us who continue to advocate for implementation without sideboards want for our fellow citizens."
"The people of Idaho voted to expand Medicaid with ""NO STRINGS ATTACHED."" Most of us know residents/neighbors who cannot afford healthcare, but will soon have coverage. Idaho legislators are trying to circumvent the vote by attaching strings to a basic right.
Strings such as ""Work & Volunteer"" requirements, co-pays, lifetime policy limits etc. The 20 hour weekly work requirement is the worst. Are we really going to humiliate our residents by making them ""Beg for their supper"" each month for insurance? It's demeaning, humiliating, inhumane & discriminatory. It's not what Idahoans voted for & it's not humanitarian for the 21st century."
What is it you legislators do not understand? We voted for the initiative AS IS. Stop trying to dilute it!
Please leave the Medicaid bill the people of Idaho voted for the way it is. We didn't vote to have a work requirement. If you want to change it you need to go back to the good people of Idaho and ask them to vote on it.
"Please stop trying to add work requirements to the medicaid expansion bill that was passed by a majority of voters in Idaho. Children would be the ones to suffer under the work requirement.
Thank you. Sincerely, Kathryn Didricksen"
The people of Idaho voted overwhelmingly to expand Medicaid coverage without restrictions. Our right-wing legislators think they know better. I do NOT support work restrictions and other administrative hurdles to limit access to healthcare. I support unrestricted Medicaid expansion in Idaho.
"Implement Medicaid expansion as voted by the citizens of Idaho, without work requirements.
I am a primary care provider at a community health center and treat the uninsured and at risk every day. Medicaid expansion needs to benefit all Idahoans in need without restriction!"
0ver 60% of our state voters supported Medicaid expansion with no expensive, bureaucratic requirements. Stop adding the work requirements and others now. We are watching and will oppose this violation of democracy forever.
"[Please leave Idaho Medicaid expansion as the voters of Idaho approved it. Our conservative legislators are trying hard to make it unusable for many people in Idaho.
Thank You]"
As a tax-paying Idaho citizen, I support full Medicaid expansion without any restrictions. State representatives supporting restriction are doing a disservice to the people of Idaho and their express desires.
Implement medicaid without the work requirements. It is the way the bill was intended. A work requirement will only throw more people off of insurance that need it. Which is IMMORAL.
As a health care provider it is critical to get more people insured in Idaho. Please do not allow waiver restrictions for the health of Idahoans and the health care system
"The State of Idaho ignored thousands of public comments opposing work requirements for Medicaid services and made no changes to the application. It does feel like Idaho legislators are not concerned about their citizens.

Idaho already experiences the highest rate of loss of insurance, including children, in the U.S. Work requirements will only add to this tragedy.

People with disabilities already have an uphill climb in their life and in maintaining benefits. Yet another unnecessary hoop for them to jump.

The hallmark intent of Medicaid is to provide coverage for those who need it and can't afford it. Work requirements in other states were found to be illegal--why should Idaho have an exemption?

I suspect this is only in contempt for people legally using their right to initiative when it was their only recourse in trying to get health care coverage for themselves and others who need it."
Please protect the will of the majority of Idaho voters and reject work requirements to Medicaid Expansion.
"The Idaho voters voted to expand Medicaid health coverage without restrictions.

Then after the public comment period (regarding the states application) they made no changes to the application despite numerous comments pointing out problems with the restrictions.

Idaho should respect the voice of the voters and expand Medicaid health coverage as the voters voted - without restrictions."
I am sending this email to express my total objection of Medicaid restrictions. The people of Idaho have voted and this vote DID NOT entail these restrictions. It is sickening that our state government has so much power to overrule and change a vote of the people. How dare they think they know what is best for us.
I am writing because I am concerned about Idahos work requirement for Medicaid recipients. I work in healthcare as a physical therapist in an outpatient setting. In my 20 years of practice I have noticed that those who need Medicaid are least able to fill out the necessary paperwork to meet the requirements. I feel that the work requirements and the harsh penalties for not showing regular 20 hour a week of work would be difficult for the needy to comply with. These people are a vulnerable population. Many are working at places where they have a little control over their work hours. It could be devastating for a family to lose their medical coverage because Walmart suddenly decided to cut costs by cutting their hours. If these patients do not receive health insurance, we will still be caring for them in the long run, but as we know the healthcare will be much more costly. where they have a little control over their work hours. It could be devastating for a family to lose their medical coverage because Walmart suddenly decided to cut costs by cutting their hours. If these patients do not receive health insurance, we will still be caring for them in the long run, but as we know the healthcare will be much more costly. By providing healthcare to those who need it, we all save in the long run.
Please see attached.

Medicaid recipients SHOULD BE REQUIRED to obtain a primary physician's referral to qualify for family planning services.
Attached, please find AARP's comment letter. Thank you.

The attached comments are submitted on behalf of the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) and its Idaho Section.
ViiV Healthcare appreciates the opportunity to submit the attached comments on Idaho's waiver proposal.
Again, the most vulnerable are the targets of this misguided legislation.
Everyone deserves equal access to care.
I oppose the imposition of work requirements for Idaho residents to receive Medicaid expansion.
The work requirement for Medicaid is not fair. How can a seriously disabled person work? People are not EQUAL. We need to help those that need help with their health issues.
"Idaho Purposefully Ignored Public Opposition and Technical Flaws with the Proposal
Over a thousand comments pointed out problems with Idahos application during the state comment period and the state ignored these concerns and made no changes to the application.
Work Requirements Will Cause Massive Coverage Losses
Idahos application concedes that 16,000 could lose coverage. Idahos policy would kick people off coverage after one month of missing a deadline. True coverage losses in Idaho will likely exceed 21,000 people.
Work Requirements Could Threaten Care for Idahoans with Disabilities
Filing for an exemption is an extra hoop to jump through for Idahoans with disabilities and could result in unnecessary coverage losses that would exacerbate their health issues.
Work Requirements are Illegal
Work requirements will only hurt Idahoans, and they violate the central tenet of Medicaid, which is to provide health coverage, not take it away. That's one reason why courts found CMS approvals illegal in very similar work requirement proposals in Kentucky, Arkansas, and New Hampshire"
More---not fewer---people need and should have access to Medicaid. Imposing a work requirement will cost lives and health in your population!
I hope Elizabeth Warren wins the Presidency so we have a more rational healthcare system. I don't think everything she hopes for will happen, but I know it will be an honest attempt to save money and lives. Your Republican leaders don't seem to be all that interested in either of those goals.
"I oppose the Medicaid Work Reporting Requirements in Idaho, which admits that 16,000 will lose coverage. Idahos policy would kick people off coverage after one month of missing a deadline. True coverage losses in Idaho will likely exceed 21,000 people.

Work requirements will only hurt Idahoans, and they violate the central tenet of Medicaid, which is to provide health coverage, not take it away. That's one reason why courts found CMS approvals illegal in very similar work requirement proposals in Kentucky, Arkansas, and New Hampshire"
"I oppose Medicaid work reporting requirements in Idaho

1. Idaho Purposefully Ignored Public Opposition and Technical Flaws with the Proposal

Over a thousand comments pointed out problems with Idahos application during the state comment period and the state ignored these concerns and made no changes to the application.

2. Work Requirements Will Cause Massive Coverage Losses

Idahos application concedes that 16,000 could lose coverage. Idahos policy would kick people off coverage after one month of missing a deadline. True coverage losses in Idaho will likely exceed 21,000 people.


3. Work Requirements Could Threaten Care for Idahoans with Disabilities

Filing for an exemption is an extra hoop to jump through for Idahoans with disabilities and could result in unnecessary coverage losses that would exacerbate their health issues.


4. Work Requirements are Illegal

Work requirements will only hurt Idahoans, and they violate the central tenet of Medicaid, which is to provide health coverage, not take it away. That's one reason why courts found CMS approvals illegal in very similar work requirement proposals in Kentucky, Arkansas, and New Hampshire.

Thank you for considering my comments."
Many people on Medicaid are disabled, alone, and not ambulatory and/or unemployable. Attaching employment restrictions to Medicaid is an obstacle that will make it impossible for some applicants to resolve and thus they will lose their coverage. Medicaid is provided by the public, not a specific political party or administration and should not be treated like it belongs to one, to be used as they see fit. Provide this public right without employment conditions.
Medicaid should not have a work requirement. People on Medicaid need health care and cannot pay for it. This is another way the Federal Government is trying to reduce spending. It seems that cutting services to the poor is easiest as tthey have no political power. [Insert Comment Here]
As a health care provider and a parent of an older college student, I would like to say these restrictions on Medicaid expansion will exclude individuals in need who are unable to work. I have stage 4 cancer. Haven't been able to work since September. So many exceptions to your rules. Please do not put more restrictions on Medicaid Expansion.
I am writing to encourage CMS to reject the Medicaid restrictions that the Idaho state government is placing on our application. The work requirement will cause health coverage loss in Idaho and that goes against the primary purpose of the Medicaid expansion. Please listen to the comments previously filed in the state by Idahoans opposing the work restrictions.
What if you are too sick to work, what then?
I oppose Medicaid work reporting requirements in Idaho where officials have deliberately ignored public opposition to them and technical flaws in the proposal. These requirements could cause serious coverage losses, threaten care for Idahoans with disabilities, and, I believe, they are illegal!
I think having a work requirement for Medicaid is a great way to help people get on their feet. We have a wonderful economy right now and there are plenty of employers hopeful of finding people who are willing to work. I worry that if we don't provide incentive for people to be independent they will go down a path that is more destructive for their well being and will not be sustainable.
Work requirements will only hurt Idahoans, and they violate the central tenet of Medicaid, which is to provide health coverage, not take it away. That's one reason why courts found CMS approvals illegal in very similar work requirement proposals in Kentucky, Arkansas, and New Hampshire
"I support the Idaho proposal for work requirements for those capable of working.

If I have to work to earn my paycheck (and pay taxes on it), it only seems fair that others should work to receive their paycheck."
if you need healthcare you often can't work! When you have to have Medicaid your pay is already criminally low. You privileged folks have no idea what it takes to live at this level - or perhaps you are cruel. ignorance of folks lives does not get you of the hook even if like the Italian fascists you just"don't care."
I oppose Medicaid work reporting requirements in Idaho. Idaho has ignored public opposition to this work waiver. Over a thousand comments to Idaho officials pointed out problems with Idaho's application, yet these concerns were ignored and no changes were made to the waiver application. If this waiver is approved, 16,000 to 21,000 people could be denied coverage. This violates the central tenet of Medicaid, which is to provide health care, not take it away.
Stop making it so hard to get health care. This so inappropriate.
I OPPOSE MEDICAID WORK REPORTING REQUIREMENTS IN IDAHO. FOLLOW THE MANDATE OF THE PEOPLE !
[Insert Reject all Medicaid restrictions! Stop harming the most vulnerable in our society.Comment Here]
I oppose the work requirements. Idahos application concedes that 16,000 could lose coverage. Idahos policy would kick people off coverage after one month of missing a deadline. True coverage losses in Idaho will likely exceed 21,000 people.
TO COWARDLY SPINELESS RETHUGLIKKANS: IMPEACH TOXIC & CORRUPT DICTATOR ADOLF TRUMP IMMEDIATELY. Retard-in-Chief & family & Cabinet belong in jail, as well as Corrupt & Obstructive McConnell. THANK U, especially for IMPEACHMENTS of ADOLPH TWITTERCLOWN & GooseStepping Sycophant Pence.[Insert Comment Here]
"Work reporting requirements in Idaho do a disservice to individuals seeking medical care and health insurance. Challenges to these requirements abound and they go against the core premise of the Medicaid program, which is to provide health insurance. Significant losses in coverage occurred as a result of work reporting requirements in Arkansas.

Low-income populations are often difficult to reach and can lack access to the internet to report their work hours. Lack of clarity about who is and is not exempt from those requirements creates issues for folks who would be able to meet the reporting requirements, but do not think that they have to. As a result they lose coverage.

Any disruption to the continuity of care is especially damaging for individuals with chronic conditions that need continual access to medication or for individuals with substance use disorder seeking treatment.

Lastly, most individuals in the Medicaid coverage gap are working. These reporting requirements are needless and further bog down the administration of the Medicaid program."
Reject medicaid restrictions.!!
Over a thousand comments pointed out problems with Idahos application during the state comment period and the state ignored these concerns and made no changes to the application.
I oppose Medicaid work requirements in Idaho. There was significant public opposition to this proposal which went unheeded. These provision will jeopardize the health of 16,000 to 20,000 individuals. To deny coverage to people because they are low-income or happen to have a disability is criminal. The State must move immediately to withdraw its application.
"Thank you for the opportunity to comment on Idahos Section 1115 Medicaid waiver proposal. I submit these comments on behalf of the Alliance for a Healthy Kansas, a statewide coalition that that works to improve the health of Kansans. The primary policy goal of the Alliance, which comprises more than 100 organizational and 12,000 individual members, is to expand the Medicaid program in Kansas.

Because of our interest in expanding Medicaid in Kansas, we closely follow expansion efforts in other states. In November 2018, 61% of Idahoans voted for a clean Medicaid expansion, which would provide health coverage to as many as 90,000 low-income Idahoans. Contrary to the public intent of this vote, however, the state of Idaho has submitted a request for a waiver to impose work reporting requirements on Medicaid beneficiaries.
We request that you reject this application. It will result in much lower Medicaid enrollment and cause Idahoans to forego needed care.

Work reporting requirements create confusing bureaucratic hoops that are difficult for beneficiaries to navigate, causing eligible people to lose coverage. They unnecessarily grow government bureaucracy and red tape and waste taxpayer dollars.

Work requirements would create an expensive secondary coverage gap of uninsured Idahoans, threatening the state budget, the livelihood of communities, and the health of Idahoans. Without health coverage through Medicaid, many will not have the health care they need to stay healthy enough to work and contribute to the community.

In Arkansas - the only state to implement a policy similar to what Idaho proposes - more than 18,000 people lost their Medicaid coverage due to the new rules. Of those who lost coverage in 2018, 89 percent remain uninsured in 2019.

Idaho's draft application indicates that approximately 18%, or 16,000 of the 91,000 Idahoans that are expected to enroll in expanded Medicaid could lose coverage. We believe this estimate is too low. In Arkansas, 23% lost coverage. This same proportion in Idaho would result in close to 21,000 people losing health coverage.

The actual number may be much higher - Idahos policy is considerably harsher than that of Arkansas, with beneficiaries losing coverage after just one month of missing paperwork deadlines. In contrast, Arkansas had a three strikes youre out policy only terminating coverage after three months of noncompliance, and they still experienced devastating coverage losses.

A recent study found th"
"[Insert Comment Heredaho Purposefully Ignored Public Opposition and Technical Flaws with the Proposal

Over a thousand comments pointed out problems with Idahos application during the state comment period and the state ignored these concerns and made no changes to the application.
Work Requirements Will Cause Massive Coverage Losses

Idahos application concedes that 16,000 could lose coverage. Idahos policy would kick people off coverage after one month of missing a deadline. True coverage losses in Idaho will likely exceed 21,000 people.
Work Requirements Could Threaten Care for Idahoans with Disabilities

Filing for an exemption is an extra hoop to jump through for Idahoans with disabilities and could result in unnecessary coverage losses that would exacerbate their health issues.
Work Requirements are Illegal

Work requirements will only hurt Idahoans, and they violate the central tenet of Medicaid, which is to provide health coverage, not take it away. That's one reason why courts found CMS approvals illegal in very similar work requirement proposals in Kentucky, Arkansas, and New Hampshire"
Please reject any restrictions to Medicaid as we try to expand it here in Kansas. We desperately need Medicaid Expansion to keep our rural hospitals open!
I oppose the Idaho's work requirement proposal for Medicaid expansion. It makes it difficult for people with disabilities and those who cannot find work readily, causing people to lose medical benefits.
[Insert Comment Here]Please do NOT add a work reporting requirement to Medicaid expansion for Idahoans!
[Insert Comment Here] Do not restrict the Medicare program in any way. Indeed, it should be expanded. Im wealthy. But, just because I have all the medical advantages available, doesnt mean I can overlook those less fortunate. Reject any new restrictions!
until we have a universal coverage, health insurance will remain unaffordable for most people who cannot get in on a group rate or who just cannot afford $800/ person for a $5000 deductible plan. And the ERs and physicians on call will be involuntarily subsidizing the State. And the patients will be much sicker for having delayed care. Everyone loses. Please expand Medicaid coverage.!plaese care about your neighbor.
I strongly oppose Medicaid work reporting requirements in Idaho
"Work requirements are punitive, ineffective, and unproductive. They should not be allowed.
Thank you,"
Despite an overwhelming win at the polls -- 61% of Idahoans voted for expansion! -- some politicians in Idaho are still trying their hardest to put up barriers to getting health care. We need to ensure people get the health care they need -- and send a message to politicians everywhere that we will NOT let them keep us from progress.
"I was one of the many people who worked to get Medicaid Expansion on the ballet to let the people decide. The people of Idaho decided to that the working poor deserved healthcare. However, our state legislature has done everything they could to squash the peoples decision due to partisan issues.
PLEASE REJECT these restrictions meant to deprive the working poor from needed healthcare."
I support Medicaid expansion and oppose work requirements
"The Tennessee Disability Coalition submits these comments in support our brothers and sisters with disabilities who live in Idaho and rely on Medicaid for their health and well-being. The Tennessee Disability Coalition and its 35 member organizations are following proposals for work requirements closely, in Tennessee and across the nation.

While the Idaho 1115 application includes a disability-related exception, we are concerned about the feasibility of its application in practice. Introduction of administratively burdensome processes for achieving and/or verifying an exemption will worsen existing access barriers for this vulnerable population and add to the already challenging administrative burdens they face.

Data show that people with disabilities want to work. Based on our direct experience, most of those who do not currently have a job very much want to be employed but often face tremendous barriers to work. Much has been written and studied about the barriers people with disabilities face. Even with the extraordinary investments and collaborative public/private partnerships to assist in addressing employment for people with disabilities, the employment rate of people with disabilities stays stubbornly low. The imposition of work requirements in Medicaid, with exceptions that require burdensome processes, will actually discourage employment of work. In order to protect access to health care in the face of employment barriers and bureaucratic red tape, the safest route for those with disabilities will be to rely on SSI and SSDI and forego the risk. This works directly against the stated purpose of work requirement proposals. It also exacerbates the under-class of individuals who are forced to live in poverty to protect their health.

Idahos application concedes that 16,000 Idahoans could lose coverage. It can be expected that individuals with disabilities will be in that group if they are either not able to meet or navigate the exemption process or unless they choose poverty in order to access critical health care.

This proposal works against the mission and purpose of the Medicaid program, and it should be rejected."
"I Oppose Medicaid Work Reporting Requirements in Idaho.

-Idaho Purposefully Ignored Public Opposition and Technical Flaws with the Proposal
-Work Requirements Will Cause Massive Coverage Losses
-Work Requirements Could Threaten Care for Idahoans with Disabilities
-Work Requirements are Illegal"
I strongly encourage you to respect the Idahoans' will when they voted for the Medicaid expansion without restrictions. Please, do not add the work requirement restriction.
No decent insurance co blocks the way to obtain the service they advertise! Insurance cos like to find ways to serve, in better ways, the clients they have; it is cheaper than trying to find new clients,
[Insunfair to a great many peopleert Comment Here]
[InseThis is a horrible requirement !rt Comment Here]
Not every one can work--many have disabilities, whether physical or mental. Also, filing for exemption adds an undue burden to those with disabilities. This is a perfect example of kicking people who are already down...please don't do this! It is heartless.
Suppose a person is seriously mentally ill. Do you expect that person to be able to work? What if you can't stand for very long but can't find a sitting job? Punish that person too? So many reasons why this is such a bad idea!
[Insert Comment Here]Despite intense public opposition during the state comment period, the Center for Medicaid and Medicare Services (CMS) has opened a federal comment period for Idahos work requirement proposal. The state of Idaho ignored thousands of public comments opposing this waiver and made no changes to the application. Use the talking points below to craft a comment for the federal record.
[IEveryone deserves to have housing and food t eat and healthcare. Comment Here]
"Medicaid is a life or death program for so many seniors (including my 96 year old uncle).
Such work requirements are an outrage and immoral."
It is in everyone's interests to have all people covered by some kind of health insurance. Some people are not able to work, but they should still have health care.
we need healthcare for all,like all other industrialized nations.America is the wealthiest country on earth,yet its citizens have a poorer lives,and less access to housing,and healthcare.
Dont limit health care. It is a right.
"No work requirement for Medicaid!
This will cause thousands to lose coverage, it is a flawed proposal with no support.
No work requirement for Medicaid!"
Reject Medicaid Restrictions, please!
"I'm writing this comment on behalf of myself and a citizen of Idaho. I oppose this 1115 waiver application to add work reporting requirements to Medicaid expansion in Idaho. There were over 700 pages of comments submitted during the state comment period with 97% of comments opposing this proposal. Arizona and Indiana have recently suspended their work reporting requirements because of the expected coverage losses. I have both professional and personal experience that pertains to how this policy would affect working low-income Idahoans. Over the past few years I have been speaking to Idahoans who live in the coverage gap and would qualify for expanded Medicaid. These Idahoans are from all corners of the state. They have health conditions, are raising families, caring for loved ones, working long hours, and still do the best they can to give back to their communities. This policy is simply unnecessary because it just sets up a bureaucratic system of paperwork reporting on a monthly basis that will ultimately cause people to lose coverage. Administratively, this is incredibly burdensome for the Department of Health and Welfare and Medicaid recipients and things will fall through the cracks. All to meet some arbitrary rule that doesn't help people work more or find employment. Idahoans will find this system complicated and confusing to navigate. In Arkansas, 18,000 lost coverage under work reporting requirements - 23% of the population. Idaho even concedes in the application 16,000 Idahoans could lost coverage. But if you apply the Arkansas coverage loss rating of 23% to Idaho, the number of Idahoans that will lose coverage is closer to 21,000. Idaho's work reporting requirements will be applied to the Medicaid expansion population as a whole, not a targeted age group as in Arkansas. This policy also has a one strike you're out rule. If a Medicaid recipient misses one month of paperwork, they lose their coverage. In Arkansas it was three months. Therefore Idaho could see substantially more than 21,000 Idahoans losing coverage.
I grew up rural Idaho County. The jobs available in rural parts of the state tend to have fluctuating hours and low wages. There is minimal internet and cell phone access. Many arent as connected to the outside and tend to be less informed of government policy changes. I have spoken to many Idahoans in the health coverage gap who are deeply concerned about this policy being implemented. Many of them have children enrolled in Medicaid an"
Idahos policy would kick people off coverage after one month of missing a deadline. True coverage losses in Idaho will likely exceed 21,000 people.Work requirements will only hurt Idahoans, and they violate the central tenet of Medicaid, which is to provide health coverage, not take it away.
"Over a thousand comments pointed out problems with Idahos application during the state comment period and the state ignored these concerns and made no changes to the application.

Idahos application concedes that 16,000 could lose coverage. Idahos policy would kick people off coverage after one month of missing a deadline. True coverage losses in Idaho will likely exceed 21,000 people.

Filing for an exemption is an extra hoop to jump through for Idahoans with disabilities and could result in unnecessary coverage losses that would exacerbate their health issues.

Work requirements will only hurt Idahoans, and they violate the central tenet of Medicaid, which is to provide health coverage, not take it away. That's one reason why courts found CMS approvals illegal in very similar work requirement proposals in Kentucky, Arkansas, and New Hampshire."
Medicaid is essential for those in need. Please make sure you do all you can to pass this.
"There is no reason why The government can give billions and tax breaks, and denied basic health to millions.

Thats not all wrong, but in Morrow. What is needed is to have a healthy population. No person should die For the lack of access to health care because they have no money to afford it.

As a citizen of this community I want people to be healthy and you have the means."
Be human not a capitalist
"I am writing you to express my displeasure with
the current effort to place restrictions on Medicaid
especially for those need it and depend upon that
medical care."
Work reporting requirements are a corrupt anti-democratic restriction on equal access to healthcare for all. These requirments and the politicians pushing them, spit in the face of principles on which this nation was founded.
No way, should Idaho require Medicaid work reporting requirements!!!
"UNFORTNATELY:
""Scholars of American history have acknowledged for a long time that the United States is FAR FROM A TRUE DEMOCRACY, OR EVEN AN ESPECIALLY EFFECTIVE REPRESENTATIVE DEMOCRACY.

""Most political decisions are made with precious little input by average citizens. What the government does with wealthy individuals and powerful corporate interests is largely removed from popular control.

""This is part of the reason voter turnout has for so long been among the lowest in the world.""--The Nation, 29 Nov. 2010."
"Work requirements are punitive for those who are the poorest and most sick and disabled. Many simply cannot work due to their disability, some of whom are going through the unfair and lengthy process of being approved/denied for Social Security Disability. Many of these people, despite having true disabilities that do not allow them to work, are unfairly denied SSD because of judges who ignore medical records simply because they believe subjectively and politically that everyone can work. This is neither true for the disabled person nor for the employers who don't want to hire these disabled persons because they don't want to make special considerations and accommodations. Especially for those disabled persons who are either waiting for years for a SSD decision or who have been denied and now have to appeal (again & again), the work requirements for Medicaid are another undeserving slap in the face, and keeps them from the Medicaid coverage they need for their medical disability.
The poorest of the poor are often overlooked for employment anyway, because they have transient housing issues due to the unaffordable housing crisis; they cannot afford appropriate work clothing; and cannot afford the transportation to and from work. This is especially true in more rural areas.
Work requirements should not be placed upon people who need Medicaid. Healthcare is a most basic human need. Everyone deserves to have healthcare. Everyone deserves to have the dignity of not having to beg for the healthcare that should be a basic human right, especially if they are that poor and in need of Medicaid. If billionaires can pay millions to Super PACs to lobby for more wealth and power, then they can start paying taxes to assist those less fortunate in the society they live in. There's no reason why destitute and disabled people should have to go without Medicaid because some politician says they must work when they cannot. Governing is not just about laws, and the budget lies and shell games politicians play. It is also about fairness and having true compassion for all those you govern. A work requirement for Medicaid is cruel."
The rich get richer and the poor get poorer.
[Insert Comment Here]Why would you think it's ok to make Medicaid and Medicare Services harder to get? No one seems to be able or ready to answer that question.
Medicaid is essential for the health of the poor
This is nothing but cruelty and heartlessness. Some Medicaid recipients may be too sick to work. Are they going be left to suffer?
[Insert Comment Here]potus needs to honor his promise of no cuts to Medicaid, and Medicare. He always preaches he makes good on his promises. Show me now, thank you.
Pleasen act in the best interest of the citzens and not give in to those who want to be privileged.[Insert Comment Here]
Medicaid should be there for anyone who needs it. Cutting bak is NOT an option.
Pass Medicaid for all
"Please delete the work requirements for Idaho medicaid.
The bureaucratic effect of these would have a serious adverse effect on the health of these persons who would lose coverage and be then unable to work. This is counterproductive to their health and community health in general."
I oppose Medicaid work reporting requirements. Work requirements will cause massive coverage losses, and that is intolerable. Work requirements also would threaten care for the disabled, and that is truly awful.
No work requirements for Medicaid. Health care should not rely on a person's ability to work for wages.
Medicaid should be expanded, not restricted.
"Work Requirements Will Cause Massive Coverage Losses

Idahos application concedes that 16,000 could lose coverage. Idahos policy would kick people off coverage after one month of missing a deadline. True coverage losses in Idaho will likely exceed 21,000 people.

Losing coverage is NOT A MEDICAID goal, nor a human goal."
"Over a thousand comments pointed out problems with Idahos application during the state comment period and the state ignored these concerns and made no changes to the application.
Idahos application concedes that 16,000 could lose coverage. Idahos policy would kick people off coverage after one month of missing a deadline. True coverage losses in Idaho will likely exceed 21,000 people.
Filing for an exemption is an extra hoop to jump through for Idahoans with disabilities and could result in unnecessary coverage losses that would exacerbate their health issues.
Work requirements will only hurt Idahoans, and they violate the central tenet of Medicaid, which is to provide health coverage, not take it away. That's one reason why courts found CMS approvals illegal in very similar work requirement proposals in Kentucky, Arkansas, and New Hampshire."
Another ignorant, plainly MEAN, action.
By not expanding Medicaid roughly 21,000 residents of Idaho would lose medical coverage. This is not what the vote was about. Expand Medicaid.
No restrictions For workers qualified for medical aid.
People must be in good health to be able to work!
"Work requirements for those already working 2-3 jobs, the deceptive paperwork requirements, the shutting down of offices people can get information and apply - this is a government activeky working AGAINST The PEOPLE of this country that they REFUSE TO OFFER MEANINGFUL JOBS AND WAGES! THIS IS A LAW DESIGNED TO HURT THE PEOPLE OF THIS NATION IN ORDER TO PLACATE THE ALREADY CRIMINALLY RICH AND BIGOTED CORRUPT PEOPLE IN BOTH STATE AND FEDERAL OFFICE AS WELL AS INTERNATIONAL AND NATIONAL CORPORATIONS. If our elected officials were actually doing their jobs- no one would need these programs. DO YOUR JOB! STOP PUNISHING THOSE THAT ACTUALLY PAY TAXES.
NO- I DO NOT SUPPORT THESE CRUEL AND CRIMINAL REQUIREMENTS WHILE THOSE SUPPORTING SUGGESTING THEM LITERALLY TAKE ALL THE CASH IN CORO WELFARE! WHEREs THE MONEY?????????"
I Oppose Medicaid Work Reporting Requirements in Idaho. Work Requirements Could Threaten Care for Idahoans with Disabilities.
[Insert Comment Here]i am in support of Medicaid Expansion without restrictions!
"Good afternoon. Voters have made their wish clear: they want Medicaid made available. By adding a work restriction, you are adding a barrier for the people who most need our help. If medical help is available before it becomes an emergency, their care will actually cost less. I say that because simple human decency doesnt seem to be a good enough reason these days.

As the president of St. Cyrils Catholic Society of St. Vincent de Paul, and a retired public school teacher, I firmly believe it to be our responsibility to help those less fortunate."
[Insert Comment Here] Please honor the will of the people of Idaho
DO THE RIGHT THING!! I was a social worker for 40 years and most people who qualify for Medicaid do so because they need to be on it!!
[This is needed now!]
Work requirements often unfairly penalize Medicaid recipients who are infirm, who have young children or who have disabilities that prevent them from working. Sometimes workers have to commute long distances to obtain employment leaving their children in unsafe communities alone.
If you're sick, you can't work! This is ridiculous.
I support Medicaid expansion.
Work requirements will only hurt Idahoans, and they violate the central tenet of Medicaid, which is to provide health coverage, not take it away. That's one reason why courts found CMS approvals illegal in very similar work requirement proposals in Kentucky, Arkansas, and New Hampshire
I am writing to oppose the proposed work requirements for Idaho's Medicaid program. The work requirements are excessive and unnecessary. Life is hard enough for folks who qualify for Medicaid--we don't need to make it any harder.
Please do NOT allow the state of Idaho to add work requirements to its Medicaid program. Work requirements are fundamentally inconsistent with the intent of the Medicaid program.
Do what is RIGHT by the American people who put you into office by rejecting medicaid expansions. You are responsible for caring for the American people!
[Insert Comment Here] Many people on Medicaid do not have the physical capacity to work, whether its due to old age, sickness, disability, etc. Please do not force labor on people in order to give them Medicaid. The people already decided what they wanted with their vote. Please dont try and make an end run around that with this requirement!
Despite intense public opposition during the state comment period, the Center for Medicaid and Medicare Services (CMS) has opened a federal comment period for Idahos work requirement proposal. The state of Idaho ignored thousands of public comments opposing this waiver and made no changes to the application. Use the talking points below to craft a comment for the federal record.
Once again our democracy overturns the majority rule. destroying my America is unacceptable!
"STOP THE ORANGE SHIT-STAIN'S HORRIBLE CHANGES!

IMPEACH AND IMPRISON THE TRAITOROUS, TANGERINE TURD, ITS MINIONS, CRONIES, FAMILY, AND ALL THE REPUGNANT REPUBLICAN'TS SUPPORTING AND ENABLING THE IDIOTIC MANGO MUSSOLINI A$$HOLE!!!!!

ANNUL THE DAY-GLO HIPPO'S ENTIRE ADMINISTRATION!!!!"
The work requirement proposal is a direct attack against people, especially the elderly, who have paid into Medicaid/medicare all of their working life are now being told that they must keep working just to receive the benefits they already paid for. This is wrong and must not be allowed to move forward. This is a direct attack against what we have paid for all of our working lives.
Work requirements for Medicaid are ridiculous and outrageous!!.. Let's deny people benefits because they are too sick or informed to work. Makes absolutely zero sense...unless you never wanted to give them the benefits they worked their whole lives to qualify for, in the first place.
Work requirements for Medicaid coverage are idiotic!!
[Insert Comment Here]reject Medicaid restrictions
This is another asinine ploy by the radical right to make things difficult for those with real health issues who might be in need of assistance. The state of Idaho was wrong to ignore comments objecting to a proposed work requirement. There were many flaws within The Idaho proposal, and they need to be addressed.
I am disabled and unemployed. I worked hard until 33 when I suffered a significant stroke forcing me to give up my social work license. I now have Medicare and Medicaid and receive social Security Disability Benefits. Those benefits are around 1350 a month, yet I am Medicaid spendown is $487 a month. I can't live independently on those funds.
Have a heart! Many of these recipients have had tough luck. How about a little compassion here?
I am opposed to work restrictions and other restrictions for people in need of Medicaid.
"I'm on it! I need it, I paid into it!
I deserve it !
So STOP STEALING FROM ME!"
health care should not be a political issue. it shpuld be available to every AMERICAN
Im writing to express my opposition relating to the proposed Medicaid restrictions. How do these proposed restrictions help better society and improve the lives of those most in need?
Medicare and Medicaid have saved my life after an auto accident. These two programs are not broken and my fear is that our President has no idea how and why it is so important.
fix up aca only.
PLEASE! NO RESTRICTIONS ON MEDICAID! So many families depend on this helping hand for their children! They desperately need your support. Thank you.
We must continue to fund Medicaid. So many of our senior citizens need Medicaid to pay for their long term care. Our we willing to put our seniors out on the street? A civilized country would never take this action. Childrens healthcare would be devastated. We CAN NOT let this program go by the waste side. If this happens the most vulnerable people will be cast out!
Adding work requirements to Medicaid/Medicare eligibility is unnecessary and does nothing to help. All these requirements do is add barriers to those who need Medicaid to afford and access healthcare. This is horrible and has no place being enacted.
There should be NO restrictions for medicaid use!
I Oppose Medicaid Work Reporting Requirements in Idaho.
This is requiring too much of feeble elderly people. Give them some peace in their old age!
Everyone in these United States should have access to healthcare? Why would any want to decide, if someone, lives or dies? Do the right thing. Thank you for reading my email. Diane McMahon
keep on truckin'!
Please reject Medicaid restrictions.
Stop screwing around and give the people what they voted for!
Idaho citizens voted overwhelmingly to expand Medicaid in the state. Please don't let state legislators override the peoples' wishes. Hopefully we still live in a democracy where votes count for something.
"[Insert Comment Here]

What are you CORRUPT REPUBLICANS doing now? There should be no restrictions what so ever on Medicaid. STOP THIS CRAP NOW."
"Medicaid is a necessity..

Maureen"
Everyone needs healthcare it is inhumane to deny basic benefits to humans we should treat people in this country as well as we do dogs!
"Work requirements add an extra hoop for people with disabilities and will lead to many people finding themselves unnecessarily losing coverage.
These are people who have the greatest need of continuing health care.

Please do not institute a work requirement."
Over a thousand comments pointed out problems with Idahos application during the state comment period and the state ignored these concerns and made no changes to the application. So what's the advantage??? Is someone going to make big money by denying these people?! This is just wong!!
i Oppose Medicaid Work Reporting Requirements in Idaho
"Dear Good People--
I have worked with children who have significant disabilities for my entire career, 43+ years. I could give countless examples of families who rely on Medicaid for their children with disabilities, and for their normal children and themselves, due to low income, inability to work due to the demands of taking care of their child(ren) with disabilities, and/or due to the parent also having a disability, as in hereditary conditions. These people need help to keep their disabled child(ren) home with their families, given adequate supports to do so. They're not shirking employment, they're just trying to get through every day to pay the rent, put gas in their car, feed their families, and pray that they don't incur any unanticipated expenses such as a car breakdown, a dental or medical emergency, etc.
These are normal people, trying to do the best for their families and challenging situations. I've been in their homes and they're NOT living off the fat of the land, they're just trying to get from one day to the next with all they have.

Do unto others. Treat others as you would want to be treated. That's the bottom line, taking care of the least among us. These parents are amazing, taking care of severely challenged children and all of the complications associated with their wide range of disabilities and medical conditions. Walk a mile in their moccasins and then tell me what you think we should do for families with such needs.
Thank you for your consideration of my experience and the truth I've witnessed for decades."
Work requirements will only hurt Idahoans, and they violate the central tenet of Medicaid, which is to provide health coverage, not take it away.
Shame on you for entertaining the notion that you can overturn the will of your citizens! This is supposed to be government of, by and for the people. The majority of Idahoans favor expanded Medicaid. Now DO YOUR JOB! HONOR THE WILL OF THE VOTERS!
"Obviously none of you have ever needed this kind of help or you would not want to add this inappropriate statement regarding employment. I was in this position 40 years ago-fleeing from abusive husband with my three small children & the clothes on our back. I wanted a job, of course, but I had to get to a safe place. Within three months I found an apartment, a job & care for my children. I needed time to get all this together. I did it in 3 months because everyone in my position wants a job, of course. Sometimes it has to wait, so stop being so cruel to mostly women in this position. I worked in a bank for very little money. Put myself through nursing school & had a wonderful career. The government would not help me at all & that is cruel. I had worked since I was 15 & I was 26 when everything in my life fell apart. By 30 I was working going to school & taking care of my kids, but a short term help from the government was desperately needed. Dont put more when in this position. My life was threatened as well as my 4 childrens lives. Help was needed & the answer was a cold NO! Walk in someone elses shoes & you will understand the urgency & desperation. Shame on anyone that votes yes for this. THINK before you act so harshly!

Kathryne J. Starzec
Retired Registered
*please excuse Ny misspellings."
"This requirement threatens people with disabilites. illness and the elderly.

This is immoral and un-American.

Our country has always helped the vulnerable and the only reason for this work requirement is an effort to close the massive Budget Deficit caused by the Trump Tax cut benefitting the rich and corporations.

These requirements used to limit Medicaid recipents need to be eliminated."
As a physician who has treated Medicaid patients I am distressed that this requirement will cause the disabled. Single mothers who are trying to scrape buy and their kids who have no voice and suffer diseases that are a danger to them and our community. Increase in vaccine preventable diseases etc.
If it was your wife, mother, or daughter, who would benefit from this cost effective plan, you would not hesitate. Please keep that perspective in mind!
No Medicaid restrictions. If you are not able to work, you should still have health care.
We, the people, need expanded Medicare, not less.
Medicaid helps low income (people WITHOUT money). Please consider others and do not take Medicaid away.
I am in favor of Medicaid expansion.
All Americans deserve basic healthcare, and treating conditions early saves money from more advanced health needs. Medicaid expansion is partly funded by federal money and also restricts contagion by treating colds, flu, childhood diseases early. It would be foolish not to expand medicaid.
"Despite intense public opposition during the state comment period, the Center for Medicaid and Medicare Services (CMS) has opened a federal comment period for Idahos work requirement proposal. The state of Idaho ignored thousands of public comments opposing this waiver and made no changes to the application. Use the talking points below to craft a comment for the federal record.

Idaho Purposefully Ignored Public Opposition and Technical Flaws with the Proposal

Over a thousand comments pointed out problems with Idahos application during the state comment period and the state ignored these concerns and made no changes to the application.
Work Requirements Will Cause Massive Coverage Losses

Idahos application concedes that 16,000 could lose coverage. Idahos policy would kick people off coverage after one month of missing a deadline. True coverage losses in Idaho will likely exceed 21,000 people.
Work Requirements Could Threaten Care for Idahoans with Disabilities

Filing for an exemption is an extra hoop to jump through for Idahoans with disabilities and could result in unnecessary coverage losses that would exacerbate their health issues.
Work Requirements are Illegal

Work requirements will only hurt Idahoans, and they violate the central tenet of Medicaid, which is to provide health coverage, not take it away. That's one reason why courts found CMS approvals illegal in very similar work requirement proposals in Kentucky, Arkansas, and New Hampshire"
"Idaho Purposefully Ignored Public Opposition and Technical Flaws with the Proposal

Over a thousand comments pointed out problems with Idahos application during the state comment period and the state ignored these concerns and made no changes to the application.
Work Requirements Will Cause Massive Coverage Losses

Idahos application concedes that 16,000 could lose coverage. Idahos policy would kick people off coverage after one month of missing a deadline. True coverage losses in Idaho will likely exceed 21,000 people.
Work Requirements Could Threaten Care for Idahoans with Disabilities

Filing for an exemption is an extra hoop to jump through for Idahoans with disabilities and could result in unnecessary coverage losses that would exacerbate their health issues.
Work Requirements are Illegal

Work requirements will only hurt Idahoans, and they violate the central tenet of Medicaid, which is to provide health coverage, not take it away. That's one reason why courts found CMS approvals illegal in very similar work requirement proposals in Kentucky, Arkansas, and New Hampshire"
"I oppose Medicaid work reporting requirements in Idaho for the following reasons:

1) Over a thousand comments pointed out problems with Idahos application during the state comment period and the state ignored these concerns and made no changes to the application.

2) Idahos application concedes that 16,000 could lose coverage. Idahos policy would kick people off coverage after one month of missing a deadline. True coverage losses in Idaho will likely exceed 21,000 people.

3) Filing for an exemption is an extra hoop to jump through for Idahoans with disabilities and could result in unnecessary coverage losses that would exacerbate their health issues.

4) Work requirements will only hurt Idahoans, and they violate the central tenet of Medicaid, which is to provide health coverage, not take it away. That's one reason why courts found CMS approvals illegal in very similar work requirement proposals in Kentucky, Arkansas, and New Hampshire.

Thank you for your consideration of these comments."
Please reject Idaho's unfair Medicaid restrictions.
Medicaid should not be restricted! It should be allowed in the state of Idaho, just imagine how many peoples lives you would help by having it!
I Oppose Medicaid Work Reporting Requirements in Idaho. It is a ridiculous and offensive requirement for people that have been looking for work for ages and may not be able to fulfill broad requirements because of health restrictions. Over a thousand comments pointed out problems with Idahos application during the state comment period and the state ignored these concerns and made no changes to the application.
[IzIt is unconscionable and contrary to public health principles to demand work from so many who are in need of publicly funded health care. lnsert Comment Here]
The USA is a wealthy nation and one of the few without healthcare being a human right. Add a job restriction is going the wrong direction.
I realize there are able-bodied individuals who apply for and receive Medicaid. However, it would be unfair and an injustice to put everyone in that same category. Single parents with few or no job skills who have children too young to be in school cannot afford daycare. Until there is an affordable daycare program in place or the children are old enough to go to pre-K or kindergarten, we cannot punish the family unit. That is what we would be doing by withholding Medicaid to single parents.
Everybody deserves health care whether or not they can afford it.
"[Insert Over a thousand comments pointed out problems with Idahos application during the state comment period and the state ignored these concerns and made no changes to the application.
Work Requirements Will Cause Massive Coverage Losses

Idahos application concedes that 16,000 could lose coverage. Idahos policy would kick people off coverage after one month of missing a deadline. True coverage losses in Idaho will likely exceed 21,000 people.
Work Requirements Could Threaten Care for Idahoans with Disabilities

Filing for an exemption is an extra hoop to jump through for Idahoans with disabilities and could result in unnecessary coverage losses that would exacerbate their health issues.
Work Requirements are Illegal

Work requirements will only hurt Idahoans, and they violate the central tenet of Medicaid, which is to provide health coverage, not take it away. That's one reason why courts found CMS approvals illegal in very similar work requirement proposals in Kentucky, Arkansas, and New HampshireComment Here]"
"Many Medicaid recipients are already working, so the requirement seems to be mainly to throw up a roadblock wherever possible.
Rather than a handout as many claim, how about a fair shot? Allow those who already work some leverage to get their feet on the ground before pulling the Medicaid rug out from under them, and allow those who cannot work to receive some mercy."
Justice in Aging's comments are attached
Most people who need Medicaid are in no shape to work, to begin with. Adding a work requirement for those people would be extremely heartless and cruel!
"If that state of Idaho adds work requirements to the MedicAid expansion in their state, 21,000 people are likely to lose health coverage. And we all know that the uninsured still seek care, but through higher-priced emergency rooms, which are still backstopped by the Federal government.

If work requirements are to be instituted, they should improve access to medical coverage, not restrict them."
Everybody needs it
Please see the attached comments from 14 patient advocacy organizations.
IF YOU need me to tell you how to do your job properly then 'you're fired!" and you can count on it. This is just a 'guess' that Voters have been kept on 'ruins' edge by you and your ilk, your political obfuscation shenanigans as biz as per usual while you sport high cost wardrobe and $200 haircuts. The tribe you've signed on with have been disenfranchising voters and putting Voters into a coma of ennui but they are awaking and arising up very very angry brandishing their legal and righteous electoral wrath which will follow you and your namesakes into the remainder of what might be left of your career and into the future historical record with your pictures condemning your shameful and inhumane aggression as a wretched cautionary example of the worst of people acting as parasites upon the body politic.
It's a shame that medicare is being determined by the very people who have unlimited medicare for the rest of their lives and yet need to decide if the people (especially those that are making the money for the top 2% of the country) don't deserve the same thing.
Medi-Care for all! It's high time the USA caught up to the rest of the western democracies!
"I am a physician in Idaho and I am strongly against the Sec. 1115 waiver regarding so-called work requirements. These restrictions will penalize working Idahoans and Americans, restrict the number of otherwise eligible recipients who will receive healthcare access, and create a second gap of people who will be forced to seek health care through the emergency room and other costly alternatives. As a hospital based pediatrician, I daily see how being underinsured and uninsured devastates peoples lives. Having a sick child is terrifying and stressful but many of the families I work with have the added stress and panic of not knowing how they will be able to afford a costly hospital stay.
Despite the fact that 61% of Idaho voters passed a clean Medicaid Expansion bill via initiative, Idahos State Legislature recently passed a law seeking to restrict access to Medicaid Expansion in our state. This is not a sound financial decision for this state and, even more concerning, this law runs counter to the will of the people of Idaho.
The purpose of Medicaid Expansion is to provide healthcare access to low-income Idahoans. Providing healthcare to this population will make them more productive at work and at home which will make our communities and our state stronger. Most of the people in the gap population work. Thus, this restriction is not a work requirement, but unnecessary, onerous paperwork that will serve as a deterrent and put the objective of strengthening our state at risk. There should be no penalty for needing Medicaid. Last year in Arkansas, nearly 18,000 people lost coverage last year because of incorrectly completed forms. Almost 90% of those people were still without coverage early this year. In Idaho, we can expect a similar effect which would result in more than 21,000 Idahoans losing coverage.

This loss in coverage will result in a second gap of thousands of people losing healthcare simply because they failed to submit paperwork correctly or on time. Illness doesnt care whether you have health insurance or not, and these people will still get sick. Without health insurance, they will be forced to seek care in the emergency room, which is the most costly way to access our healthcare system. This will increase costs for Idaho Taxpayers and provide inadequate care to recipients, thus defeating the purpose of Medicaid Expansion and the will of Idahoans.

For the reasons set forth above, I encourage you to deny this restriction to Med"
Why are you trying to make things more difficult for people to get health care. The folks who need Medicare already have enough of barriers in their way without you adding this! Stop being heartless.
Please protect Medicaid. It needs to be expanded NOT restricted.
I oppose Medicaid Work Reporting requirements in Idaho as these rules will hurt those people who need it most.
Denying food to people struggling with poverty is criminal and depresses the economy. Since 70% of our economic activity is consumer spending, the goal should be to put as much money as possible into the pockets of low-income people, as they will spend it immediately and stimulate the economy. The cost? Nothing. It will all come back as tax revenue from the retail profits.
"I strongly Oppose Medicaid Work Reporting Requirements in Idaho.

Idaho Ignored Public Opposition and Technical Flaws with the Proposal

Over a thousand comments pointed out problems with Idahos application during the state comment period and the state ignored these concerns and made no changes to the application--purposeful disregard which you should not condone by approving.
Work Requirements Will Cause Massive Coverage Losses

Idahos application concedes that 16,000 could lose coverage. Idahos policy would kick people off coverage after one month of missing a deadline. True coverage losses in Idaho will likely exceed 21,000 people.

Work Requirements Could Threaten Care for Idahoans with Disabilities

Filing for an exemption is an extra hoop to jump through for Idahoans with disabilities and could result in unnecessary coverage losses that would exacerbate their health issues.

Work Requirements are Illegal

Work requirements will only hurt Idahoans, and they violate the central tenet of Medicaid, which is to provide health coverage, not take it away. That's one reason why courts found CMS approvals illegal in very similar work requirement proposals in Kentucky, Arkansas, and New Hampshire--please show respect for the law by complying with the courts' orders, which is required for you to comply with the law, and deny Idaho's request not to comply with the law."
"Idaho Purposefully Ignored Public Opposition and Technical Flaws with the Proposal

Over a thousand comments pointed out problems with Idahos application during the state comment period and the state ignored these concerns and made no changes to the application.
Work Requirements Will Cause Massive Coverage Losses

Idahos application concedes that 16,000 could lose coverage. Idahos policy would kick people off coverage after one month of missing a deadline. True coverage losses in Idaho will likely exceed 21,000 people.
Work Requirements Could Threaten Care for Idahoans with Disabilities

Filing for an exemption is an extra hoop to jump through for Idahoans with disabilities and could result in unnecessary coverage losses that would exacerbate their health issues.
Work Requirements are Illegal

Work requirements will only hurt Idahoans, and they violate the central tenet of Medicaid, which is to provide health coverage, not take it away. That's one reason why courts found CMS approvals illegal in very similar work requirement proposals in Kentucky, Arkansas, and New Hampshire"
I oppose Medicaid Work Reporting Requirements being inflicted on the poor.
WORK SHOULD BE GIVEN AS AN O P T I O N, AND N O T ! BE A REQUIREMENT !!!!
I and my daughter were on Medicaid when I was on welfare due to ex husband not paying child support. although I worked I had to pay a babysitter almost as much as I made. We need to have everyone covered by health insurance including Medicaid. Like every other advanced and civilized country. Carol Delaney
I oppose Medicaid work requirements as detailed in Idaho's Medicaid application. They are a threat to people with disabilities. States should not be allowed such latitude with federal funding for a federal program. Work requirements in other states have been deemed illegal. Idaho is ignoring its citizen's valid concerns. And please remember the children whose health depends on Medicaid coverage. Where is the pro-life rhetoric about precious children's lives in this state's application?
I oppose Medicaid work reporting requirements!
[Insert Comment Here] Say NO to Medicaid restrictions!
there should be no work requirement for Medicaid recipients. Shame on you!
Every study done on what what work reporting requirements do to those on medicaid -shows that these measures further traumatize people who are already profoundly struggling . There's no need for further cruelties.
"[Insert Comment Here]There are many people who are either on and/or qualify to be on Medicaid, who are NOT able to work, and for quite a few different reasons.

This whole ""work requirement"" has NOTHING to do with preventing fraud, and EVERYTHING to do with punishing the most needy and least powerful people in this country.

And it's all part of the ""master plan"" of the sociopathic .0001%er's, who really want the world to be back to the fuedal days, with them as the ""rulers"", and all the rest of us as their ""serfs""."
Getting health care should have nothing to do with working! People who need health care should get it without conditions.
Please stop the stipulations on medicaid and poor people! Maybe if you raise the MINIMUM WAGE people could afford to pay for their own insurance!!
Health care is a right. There are no restrictions to gain health care.
". Idaho Purposefully Ignored Public Opposition and Technical Flaws with the Proposal
. Work Requirements Will Cause Massive Coverage Losses
. Work Requirements Could Threaten Care for Idahoans with Disabilities.
.Work requirements will only hurt Idahoans, and they violate the central tenet of Medicaid, which is to provide health coverage, not take it away. That's one reason why courts found CMS approvals illegal in very similar work requirement proposals in Kentucky, Arkansas, and New Hampshire"
"While I know that you guys love taking things away from people in crisis, maybe you should consider what you'd want the government to do if it was you or your family that was in need. Things happen, jobs are lost, and life can become very difficult quickly.

Please don't take away needed benefits based on work reporting. This just complicates the lives of people that are already on the edge."
Medicaid work reporting requirements are rooted in the faulty assumption that people who don't work are lazy bums and that taking away their health coverage is a way to fix that. Experience has taught us that is flat-out wrong. One, most people who need Medicaid are not lazy, unmotivated and unwilling. Those who are should be dealt with in other ways. Denying health coverage always winds up costing us way more as people get sicker and need costlier and urgent care. May I also remind you that many people who are out there in need are -- but for the Grace of God -- quite possibly you and me. All you have to do is get horribly ill and watch everything you've worked for go down the tubes and land your behind in homelessness. Financing programs that put people back on their feet with temporary shelter, some education, and job placement help are ultimately the far better and cheaper way to address these problems. And last, but not least, remember that thing that Jesus Christ said about the "Least of these"??? Think he was campaigning or kidding?
Quit wasting taxpayer money! We voted. We won. Knock it off.
Work requirements defeat the purpose.
[We're the richest country on the Planet, we buy 26 room Mansion for two, a Fleet of imported luxury expensive sport cars, a Private Jet and run-way. Yet, the less fortunate poor and elderly are still begging for access to local / state-wide affordable health care with lower medical prescription cost. This needs revising asap?Insert Comment Here]
Medicaid recipients are generally either children or physically unable to work or already working multiple gig jobs. The whole point of medicaid is to deliver health care to people who cannot work, or cannot work any more. Work requirements for medicaid will mean many people losing all health care, and are illegal anyway. Idaho needs to drop this idea now.
"The GOP is corrupt.........just like Trump is CORRUPT...........All they care about is taxing 99% of Americans to pay for their 1% super rich taxes.
THE GOP MUST BE DESTROYED.................
Trump is DESTROYING AMERICA.........
HE STILL HASN'T SHOWN HIS TAXES....
He is a liar and cheater."
"Please support access to Medicaid and reject restrictions
Thank you"
People that need Medicare need it to be healthy enough to be able to work
"Work Requirements are Illegal

Work requirements will only hurt Idahoans, and they violate the central tenet of Medicaid, which is to provide health coverage, not take it away. That's one reason why courts found CMS approvals illegal in very similar work requirement proposals in Kentucky, Arkansas, and New Hampshire[Insert"
[Insert Comment Here]Drumpf is trying to pay for the tax cuts at the expense of the working man and it has to stop. Absolutely leave Medicaid alone and TELL drumpf to find another way like repealing those tax cuts
"It's easy for people in the upper echelons of income to TAKE from the little and underserved people.

Those who despise""socialism"" need to admit that fema, fda, CDC, public schools & roads, farmer subsidies are indeed socialist. Let's take care of everyone!"
"I reject the proposed medicaid restrictions. Healthcare is a right of allAmericans whether you are poor or rich.
Dr. Paul Levy"
"[Insert Comment Here]I urge CMS to reject Medicaid restrictions such as work reporting requirements. Other states have found CMS approvals illegal in similar requirements/

Thank you."

"Please stand up for the will of the voters and defend the healthcare for thousands of people in Idaho. Dont support adding work requirements for the Medicaid expansion.

Thank you"
Idahos application concedes that 16,000 could lose coverage. Idahos policy would kick people off coverage after one month of missing a deadline. True coverage losses in Idaho will likely exceed 21,000 people.
"I am writing to express my concern.

Over 1,000 comments pointed out problems with Idaho's application during the state comment period, and the state ignored these concerns and made no changes to the application.

Idaho's application concedes that 16,000 could lose their coverage. Idaho's policy would kick people off coverage after only one month of missing a deadline. It seems likely that true coverage losses would exceed 21,000 people.

Filing for an exemption is an extra hoop to jump through for Idahoans with disabilities. Why impose this?

The whole idea should be to ensure Idahoans have coverage, not to find ways to strip their coverage.

Finally, courts have found that such elements in Kentucky, Arkansas, and New Hampshire were illegal.

Please remedy this situation.

Respectfully,
Rabbi Dr. J.B. Sacks"
"[Insert Comment Here]
Please oppose any attempts by Idaho or any other state to establish work requirements for any Medicare Services. These preposed rules will only bring harm to many people and not be of any benefit to the nation."
"Over a thousand comments pointed out problems with Idahos application during the state comment period and the state ignored these concerns and made no changes to the application.

Work requirements will only hurt Idahoans, and they violate the central tenet of Medicaid, which is to provide health coverage, not take it away. That's one reason why courts found CMS approvals illegal in very similar work requirement proposals in Kentucky, Arkansas, and New Hampshire

Idaho's actions go directly against the sacred tenets of ""government of the people, by the people, for the people"" by dismissing so many people as not worthy of their government's actions to better their lives, and all people's lives."
[Insert Comment Here]tell me how people are going to work when they are ill, disabled or too old to work? Leaders today have lost all common sense. You have to think about those who are less fortunate, rents have become due to greed a choice of rent or medicine. But your evil greedy leaders dont care about others but themselves
Please dont punish people, especially children, for being poor. We are, indeed, our brothers/sisters keepers.
"Work requirements for Medicaid discriminate against the weakest members of our citizenry, those who need health care the most,
Until we have well paid jobs with benefits available for all, this rule is unjust."
Just do the right thing for a change, please.
"I oppose work requirements because they do not work and very irritated that legislature is committed to ignoring the will of We The People.

Idahoans clearly do not want work requirements as they know work requirements actually disenfranchise people, thus costing individuals and the state more money.

Work requirements overwhelmingly cause coverage loss, and end up costing taxpayers more, much more.

The People of Idaho clearly did not want to add more barriers to expansion caused by adding work requirements.

NO ON WORK REQUIREMENTS as it is too costly."
[Insert Comment Here]please dont add a work requirement for expanded Medicare. Not everyone can work and many are out of work because of things beyond their control like an economic downturn
"[Please, please put the health of people FIRST. Work requirements will only hurt Idahoans, and they violate the central tenet of Medicaid, which is to provide health coverage, not take it away

Idahos application concedes that 16,000 could lose coverage. Idahos policy would kick people off coverage after one month of missing a deadline. True coverage losses in Idaho will likely exceed 21,000 people]"
[Insert Comment Here]we need expansions not restrictions.
I am writing to ask that you oppose the Medicaid Work Reporting Requirements in Idaho. Although I do not live in Idaho, I can appreciate the difficulties faced by people who are in need of health care and cannot afford it. The "work requirement" will cause so many to lose any coverage they have through Medicaid, a program that is supposed to help the needy and disabled. If we can pay for Trump's endless golfing vacations, pouring millions of tax dollars into his pockets, surely we can pay for health care for our neediest.
You are literally killing people! If you prevent people from receiving care for small problems, the problems will only get bigger, harder to treat, and more expensive. It is penny wise and pound foolish!
Healthcare and Medicaid expansion is very important to many Americans,supporting and protecting moving forward is crucial
My 62 year old son, who has a part-time (20 hour) work week, and is largely responsible for keeping us in our home, cannot get Medicaid--and he needs it.
Work requirements do not make any sense for Medicaid.
I Oppose Medicaid Work Reporting Requirements in Idaho.
"I strongly Oppose Medicaid Work Reporting Requirements in Idaho.

Idaho Purposefully Ignored Public Opposition and Technical Flaws with the Proposal

Over a thousand comments pointed out problems with Idahos application during the state comment period and the state ignored these concerns and made no changes to the application.

Work Requirements are Illegal

Work requirements will only hurt Idahoans, and they violate the central tenet of Medicaid, which is to provide health coverage, not take it away. That's one reason why courts found CMS approvals illegal in very similar work requirement proposals in Kentucky, Arkansas, and New Hampshire"
I oppose Medicaid work reporting requirements in Idaho because it will result in massive coverage loss.
Work requirements are not appropriate for many people. One size for all does not fit
"Work requirements will be a major hardship for many persons. Filing for an exemption may be a challenge for persons with disabilities and could result in unnecessary coverage losses that would exacerbate their underlying health conditions.
Work requirements are a violation of the central concept of Medicaid which is to provide health coverage, not take it away."
No restrictions!
NO MEDICAID restrictions should be put on our sickest and lowest income citizens!
I strongly oppose the poposed Medicaid restrictions! Please vote to reject them!
"Idaho Purposefully Ignored Public Opposition and Technical Flaws with the Proposal. Over a thousand comments pointed out problems with Idahos application during the state comment period and the state ignored these concerns and made no changes to the application.

Work Requirements Will Cause Massive Coverage Losses. Idahos application concedes that 16,000 could lose coverage. Idahos policy would kick people off coverage after one month of missing a deadline. True coverage losses in Idaho will likely exceed 21,000 people.

Work Requirements Could Threaten Care for Idahoans with Disabilities. Filing for an exemption is an extra hoop to jump through for Idahoans with disabilities and could result in unnecessary coverage losses that would exacerbate their health issues.

Work Requirements are Illegal. Work requirements will only hurt Idahoans, and they violate the central tenet of Medicaid, which is to provide health coverage, not take it away. That's one reason why courts found CMS approvals illegal in very similar work requirement proposals in Kentucky, Arkansas, and New Hampshire."
Pass Medicare for all!
I am on Medicare now but my wife is on medicaid,so others so many people in US whom their wives are on medicaid so We do not want any kind of restrictions on this plan.
Reject Medicaid Restrictions
The Reagan era concept of the widespread "welfare queens" had been debunked long ago. VERY few people who are physically able want to sit around on the dole. Regulations made to punish a very few more often punish innocent victims of circumstance.
Idaho should get out of the way of Medicaid. Let Medicaid take care of the people of Idaho as it is created to do.
Obviously elected morons who want a work requirement for all who apply for Medicaid have NO KNOWLEDGE about the recipients of Medicaid. Many people who receive Medicaid are residents of retirement homes. They are people who have out lived their assets. Fortunately, Medicaid is available to pay the cost of residing in a retirement home AND these people are RETIRED citizens, many of whom are NOT PHYSICALLY ABLE to work. Our elected morons need to educate them selves about those who are eligible for Medicaid. As is so typical with the moron trump in the White House, there is NO CONCERN about any citizens except the WHITE, RICH 1% of our population. As you know, the moron in the White House continues to try to eliminate the Affordable Care Act, Social Security, SNAP, Medicare and Medicaid. He and his supporters are the most ignorant, racist persons to ever hold an office in the government. Hopefully, the moron crook in the White House will be impeached.
"Despite intense public opposition during the state comment period, the Center for Medicaid and Medicare Services (CMS) has opened a federal comment period for Idahos work requirement proposal. The state of Idaho ignored thousands of public comments opposing this waiver and made no changes to the application.

Idaho Purposefully Ignored Public Opposition and Technical Flaws with the Proposal:
Over a thousand comments pointed out problems with Idahos application during the state comment period, but the state ignored these concerns and made no changes to the application.

Work Requirements Will Cause Massive Coverage Losses: Idahos application concedes that 16,000 could lose coverage. Idahos policy would kick people off coverage after one month of missing a deadline. True coverage losses in Idaho will likely exceed 21,000 people.

Work Requirements Could Threaten Care for Idahoans with Disabilities: Filing for an exemption is an extra hoop to jump through for Idahoans with disabilities and could result in unnecessary coverage losses that would exacerbate their health issues.

Work Requirements are Illegal: Work requirements will only hurt Idahoans, and they violate the central tenet of Medicaid, which is to provide health coverage, not take it away. That's one reason that courts found CMS approvals illegal in very similar work requirement proposals in Kentucky, Arkansas, and New Hampshire.

These Medicaid Restrictions must be rejected!"
[Insert Comment Here] They need Medicare expansion that doesnt mean theyre capable of working you need to rethink this please
I oppose Medicaid Work Reporting Requirements in Idaho. To have over a thousand comments period and have the state ignore these concernsand make no changes to applications is horrible. Please change those applications. This is a most difficult for Idahoans with disabilities. This is illegal. Please remove this requirement.
"Despite intense public opposition during the state comment period, the Center for Medicaid and Medicare Services (CMS) has opened a federal comment period for Idahos work requirement proposal. The state of Idaho ignored thousands of public comments opposing this waiver and made no changes to the application. Use the talking points below to craft a comment for the federal record.

Idaho Purposefully Ignored Public Opposition and Technical Flaws with the Proposal

Over a thousand comments pointed out problems with Idahos application during the state comment period and the state ignored these concerns and made no changes to the application.

Work Requirements Will Cause Massive Coverage Losses

Idahos application concedes that 16,000 could lose coverage. Idahos policy would kick people off coverage after one month of missing a deadline. True coverage losses in Idaho will likely exceed 21,000 people.

Work Requirements Could Threaten Care for Idahoans with Disabilities

Filing for an exemption is an extra hoop to jump through for Idahoans with disabilities and could result in unnecessary coverage losses that would exacerbate their health issues.

Work Requirements are Illegal

Work requirements will only hurt Idahoans, and they violate the central tenet of Medicaid, which is to provide health coverage, not take it away. That's one reason why courts found CMS approvals illegal in very similar work requirement proposals in Kentucky, Arkansas, and New Hampshire"
In many situations, Medicaid is needed because someone CANNOT work. How foolish (and cruel!) it would be to insist on a work requirement.
Its time to support both Medicare and Medicaid.
Every other westernised country has free healthcare for all. Its not rocket science. We can't keep hearing how the US is the most advanced nation on earth but cannot manage what all the other countries can. And if anyo e wants to go private - GO PRIVATE! Noone cares.
[Insert Comment Here]it is short-sighted to restrict healthcare, especially preventive care. It ends up increasing costs in the future.
[Insert Comment Here]Please expand Medicaid for all states!!!! The people of this country deserve decent medical care!! Support the people!!!
Requiring sick people to work for their health care is bad for them and the rest of us. When sick people can't get care, they are more likely to spread their illness to everyone else. There are too many unexpected consequences, and this proposal is not worth the risk.
Work requirements for Medicaid are absurd. Part of the point of Medicaid is that many of its recipients CANT work. We already live in a country where hundreds of thousands of able-bodied, experienced people struggle to get jobs that dont even cover the cost of their basic needs. What sense does it make to tell the elderly, the developmentally disabled, those with severe chronic and/or mental illnesses that they now must somehow compete in a market that is already failing the average American? If we right the sinking ship that is the US economy, so that it isnt just the people at the top making obscene profits, then there will be enough to care for our more vulnerable citizens. Its what a truly great country would do!
i say keep fighting for the people
[Insert Comment Here]Please, Please do the right thing not the trump thing!
Health care should be free.
"Work requirements have no place in Medicaid.
What is the effect on the disabled? I believe they would have to file for an exemption that could result in coverage losses and damage their health.

Are at home mothers or fathers supposed to go for another job?"
Work requirements for Medicaid are inhumane. Please reject the concept. Thank you.
The people did not vote for restrictions on Medicaid. We voted for the improvement in coverage! Disabled people need this coverage. For once stop trying to change what we have voted on. The vote gave you the wants of the people not the ok to start trying to change the vote!
Do not require Medicaid work reporting requirements. Thank you.
"Stop ignoring thousands of public comments opposing this waiver and make the necessary changes to the application to ensure people get the coverage they deserve. After all, 61% of Idahoans voted FOR the Medicaid expansion.

Work Requirements Will Cause Massive Coverage Losses

Idahos application concedes that 16,000 could lose coverage. Idahos policy would kick people off coverage after one month of missing a deadline. True coverage losses in Idaho will likely exceed 21,000 people.
Work Requirements are Illegal

Work requirements will only hurt Idahoans, and they violate the central tenet of Medicaid, which is to provide health coverage, not take it away. That's one reason why courts found CMS approvals illegal in very similar work requirement proposals in Kentucky, Arkansas, and New Hampshire"
Have a heart for those that want to go on living but need MEDICAID to go on. Doctors fees, the price of medications is so high that only the rich can afford it. Is that fair? Are you going to be responsible for their sure deaths if they cant be treated by professionals that can help them and medicines that back them up? Think about it. You never know when you can turn into those humans that cant afford doctors fees, tests and drugs to stay alive. Life is what happens when youre busy making your own plans.

"I am opposed to Idaho's work requirement and its ignoring of thousands of voices opposing this waiver.

Disgusting."
"And please remember we are talking about a RIGHT(NOT a privilege) of all citizens to health care and the financial support when necessary to obtain this health care. Do the right, just and compassionate action and REJECT these Medicaid restrictions.
Sincerely,
Robert Kantner"
[The expansion is necessary to provide access to medical care to the most vulnerable among us as a human race. To deny our people medical access is criminal. Those who oppose medical care for our fellow human beings shows their disdain for their fellowman and lack of humanity.
"[Insert Comment Here]Medicaid Expansion is only fair to the General, American Pubic of the most successful economy in the World.

The public has been reconfiguring their monthly obligations to meet the ever increasing cost of living choices.

It is only fair to evaluate success coverage of theses Americans to those whom were Elected to Represent All Americans."
No restrictions
People of all classes deserve healthcare
Work requirements will only hurt Idahoans, and they violate the central tenet of Medicaid, which is to provide health coverage, not take it away. That's one reason why courts found CMS approvals illegal in very similar work requirement proposals in Kentucky, Arkansas, and New Hampshire
This is just the depraved Republican way of saving money for their own selfish use by screwing others out of funds that have already been allocated for them.
Stop punishing the poor. Medicaid work requirements are wrong.
YOU RUINED IT FOR PEOPLE. YOU SENT ALL THE JOBS TO CHINA, WHERE PEOPLE ARE EXPLOITED AND TORTURED. YOU DID THIS! QUIT EXPECTING PEOPLE TO BE SERVENTS.
[Insertmedicaid expansion giving the most constituents medical coverage is so important and should be a priority to be made into law immediately Comment Here]
this is pennywise and pound foolish- when people don't have access to ongoing medical care, they get sicker, and end up costing society far more for emergency care, will spread disease etc, what are you saving here? nothing!
I strongly oppose medicad work reporting requirements proposed by Idaho. The state of Idaho ignored thousands of public comments opposing the waiver. Moreover, it adoption will cause thousands of people to lose vital coverage.
Medicaid work requirements don't make sense. So many Medicaid recipients are unable to work because of physical, emotional, and/or intellectual disablities, some of which are unseen. If a doctor has noted, for any reason, that a person cannot work, keeping that person off Medicaid certainly doesn't make sense. I think the new rules are harsh and inconsistent with the reason Medicaid exists.
Have some humanity please
Reject Medicaid restrictions
Please Remove All Work Requirements For Medicare Recipients In Idaho. This Proposal Is One Of The Most Heinous And, Frankly, Downright Evil Proposals In The History Of The Human Race. IT MUST BE STOPPED!!!!
]I write this in favor of Medicaid coverages with the existing work requirements. But, with the caveat-if need- a financial penalty make for good good perscription, hospitalization and all patient coverages. Many people rely solely on this until they pass on. I know-too others around the country and family in PA, CA, and MA do-too.
How is a person able to fulfill a "work requirement" if they are ill???
"I am a retired woman who worked all her life to support herself and family. Without Medicare I would be dead.
Work requirements will only hurt Idahoans, and they violate the central tenet of Medicaid, which is to provide health coverage, not take it away. That's one reason why courts found CMS approvals illegal in very similar work requirement proposals in Kentucky, Arkansas, and New Hampshire."
Work requirements are illegal, threaten the health of Idahoans, and could cause massive loss of coverage.
"If America's greedy, corrupt, anti-American, liars sitting in our government weren't holding hands & kissing the insurance & pharmaceutical companies we would be able to have what other countries have.
GRED=INHUMANITY"
"I oppose the Medicaid work reporting requirements in the state of Idaho. During the application process, the state government purposefully ignored public opposition and technical flaws in the proposal.

The state's own estimate is that these requirements could deprive 16,000 Idahoans of their coverage, while independent estimates are that over 21,000 people would lose coverage.

The state's proposal also threatens the coverage of citizens with disabilities by requiring them to file for an exemption.

Finally, similar proposals as this have already been found to be illegal in several other states."
People with low income and no health insurance offered through their work need the protection and care of Medicaid. We should not be restricting this government program, as more and more businesses are failing their employees and in some cases fighting to remain open. Furthermore, no one should be denied on account of their gender, race, background, mobility, health, or marital status.
People cant work if they are ill. Work requirements will cause many to lose healthcare and any hope of ever being able to work. Medicaid was established to provide healthcare, not to deny it to people who cant work. This is a public health issue and a serious moral issue.
REJECT MEDICAID RESTRICTIONS
We're trying to start a business. I have Stage 4 metastasized breast cancer. Hopefully we won't lose Medicaid as we ramp up.
Is it stupidity or greed?
"Re: Idaho's 1115 Work Requirement Waiver

Utah Health Policy Project (UHPP) is a nonpartisan, nonprofit organization dedicated to advancing sustainable health care solutions through better access, education, and public policyincluding providing affordable and accessible insurance coverage to as many people as possible. UHPPs mission focuses on underserved Utahns. Since 2006, UHPP has worked to develop policies that create a health system that provides better access to higher quality health care at a lower cost. We pride ourselves on being an open resource for the public, community leaders, the media, businesses, health care providers, and policymakers. Our unbiased, consumer-focused approach strives to find solutions that best fit Utah.
UHPP was a part of the steering committee behind the successful Proposition 3 ballot initiative effort to fully expand Medicaid in Utah. We are concerned about the waiver process both Utah and Idaho are undergoing right now, and write to express our opposition to work reporting requirements.
UHPP opposes any barriers to gaining and maintaining Medicaid eligibility for qualified population, including community engagement/work requirements. Other safety net programs, like Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) and the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), demonstrate that these requirements act as a barriereven to working people, and even with exemptions in place.

Coverage Losses

Now that an evaluation of Arkansas work requirement has been published, we have evidence that not only do work requirement not encourage work, they lead to disenrollment. A recent New England Journal of Medicine study shows an increase in the unemployment rate and an increase in the uninsured rate among the population targeted by the work reporting requirement in that state. This is exactly the result that health care advocates warned would occur.
Arkansas is the only state where these work reporting requirements have been implemented, and in only seven months during 2018, more than 18,000 individuals lost Medicaid coverage due to the requirement barrier. Only 2,000 individuals have re-enrolled, and fewer have found employment since. New Hampshire found similar results when they realized that 17,000 enrollees were at risk of losing coverage after they began rolling out their work reporting requirement. As a result, the New Hampshire Department of Health and Human Services suspended their program before it was ultimately se"
"Unfair and immoral! The Republican Party never had ANYTHING TO DO WITH enacting or caring about Medicare, Medicaid or Social Security. So tell me why you think that you understand how to help retirees and those who were crowded out from your trickle-down fairy tales?
Your Party is despicable, headed by the worst president this country has ever had to put up with. You should all be ashamed of yourselves!"
"I strongly oppose any work requirement being attached to receipt of Medicaid. Despite intense public opposition during the state comment period, the Center for Medicaid and Medicare Services (CMS) has opened a federal comment period for Idahos work requirement proposal. The state of Idaho ignored thousands of public comments opposing this waiver and made no changes to the application.

Idaho Purposefully Ignored Public Opposition and Technical Flaws with the Proposal. Over a thousand comments pointed out problems with Idahos application during the state comment period and the state ignored these concerns and made no changes to the application.

Work Requirements Will Cause Massive Coverage Losses. Idahos application concedes that 16,000 could lose coverage. Idahos policy would kick people off coverage after one month of missing a deadline. True coverage losses in Idaho will likely exceed 21,000 people.

Work Requirements Could Threaten Care for Idahoans with Disabilities. Filing for an exemption is an extra hoop to jump through for Idahoans with disabilities and could result in unnecessary coverage losses that would exacerbate their health issues.

Work Requirements are Illegal. Work requirements will only hurt Idahoans, and they violate the central tenet of Medicaid, which is to PROVIDE health coverage, not take it away. That's one reason why courts found CMS approvals illegal in very similar work requirement proposals in Kentucky, Arkansas, and New Hampshire. Therefore this proposal from Idaho should not be considered. It is a waste of time and my tax dollars."
For the Republicans its a democracy when the vote goes their way otherwise they pretend they are living at the Vatican or in a monarchy as now in Idaho with the expansion of Medicaid.
Easy access to medical care is a boon for everyone! Public health is not individual but medical care unfortunately is! Every other developed country in the world provides truly universal healthcare!
Tell the stupid president that Medicaid restrictions are inhumane and that people need this help to pay bills.
the ill need care not work conditions
Work requirements will cause massive coverage losses and could threaten care for Idahoans with disabilities. Medicare was designed to provide care for all, not to take it away.
Eighty seven 87% of people on medicaid are children, disabled or senior citizens. What, your going to send them all out to get a job? Get real. Martha Gilliland
Listen to the voters. Hard working people need healthcare. They don't need government paperwork and red tape.
Eighty seven 87% of people on medicaid are children, disabled or senior citizens. What, your going to send them all out to get a job? Get real. Martha Gilliland 
Do something to HELP PEOPLE.....for a change!!!!
Stop the work requirements to receive Medicaid; its hard enough to ask for help, don't make it harder!!!! Thank you!
Health care must not be restricted or made conditional on requirementss dictated by cruel ideologies.
"[Insert Comment Here]NO REDUCTIONS IN MEDICAID OR MEDICARE, PERIOD!!
PROVIDE PROTECTINS AGAINST PREDATORY INSURANCE AND PRESCRIPTION PRICES! This"
No work requirements for Medicaid.
Medicaid provides a lifeline. Without it, people die. Please dont add more restrictions.
How can sick people be expected to be working? It's illogical, abusive, and cruel.
"Work requirements are expensive and illegal.

The extra cost of tracking work hours for both the state and the people on Medicaid will far out weigh the cost of having all people otherwise eligible on Medicaid. Then there is the extra cost of emergancy care verses doctor care for those without Medicaid coverage.

Where work requirements were in effect, many people did not understand the reporting requirements, or had difficulty reporting and were improperly denied coverage. Someone without a car or smart phone can have a big problem here.

A number of states tried work requirements but were sued and courts ruled them illegal."
AMERICA...WHERE ONLY THE RICH CAN AFFORD MEDICAL CARE OR AN EDUCATION!!!!!
Health Care is a Human Right!
"Idaho purposefully ignored public opposition and technical flaws with the proposal. Over a thousand comments pointed out problems with Idahos application during the state comment period and the state ignored these concerns and made no changes to the application.

Work Requirements Will Cause Massive Coverage Losses. Idahos application concedes that 16,000 could lose coverage. Idahos policy would kick people off coverage after one month of missing a deadline. True coverage losses in Idaho will likely exceed 21,000 people.

Furthermore, work requirements could threaten care for Idahoans with disabilities.

Filing for an exemption is an extra hoop to jump through for Idahoans with disabilities and could result in unnecessary coverage losses that would exacerbate their health issues.

Work requirements in this case are not only illegal, but will only hurt Idahoans: These requirements violate the central tenet of Medicaid, which is to provide health coverage, not take it away. That's one reason why courts found CMS approvals illegal in very similar work requirement proposals in Kentucky, Arkansas, and New Hampshire.

For all these reasons...please reject these cruel illegal Medicaid restrictions."
[Insert ComWork requirements will only hurt Idahoans, and they violate the central tenet of Medicaid, which is to provide health coverage, not take it away. That's one reason why courts found CMS approvals illegal in very similar work requirement proposals in Kentucky, Arkansas, and New Hampshirement Here]
"Idahos application concedes that 16,000 could lose coverage. Idahos policy would kick people off coverage after one month of missing a deadline. True coverage losses in Idaho will likely exceed 21,000 people.

Work requirements will only hurt Idahoans, and they violate the central tenet of Medicaid, which is to provide health coverage, not take it away. That's one reason why courts found CMS approvals illegal in very similar work requirement proposals in Kentucky, Arkansas, and New Hampshire."
people depend on these progrmas , they are not wealthy like you




"The Northwest Portland Area Indian Health Board (NPAIHB) is appreciative and supportive of the exemption for AI/ANs eligible for IHS or tribal health program services (""IHS beneficiary"") under Idaho law and included in the Section 1115 demonstration waiver application. Since the Idaho law exemption is broader than AI/AN tribal members, we request the IDHW ensure inclusion of this broader definition to exempt all AI/AN IHS beneficiaries from Medicaid work and community engagement requirements in its 1115 submission. Tribes in other states that have submitted work requirement waivers have been forced to work with state Medicaid leadership to negotiate an exemption for AI/ANs. CMS must ensure that Idaho Tribes are not faced with an administrative burden or barriers in obtaining an exemption for all AI/AN IHS beneficiaries from Medicaid work and community engagement requirements in Idaho. This has been codified by state law and should be honored by CMS. NPAIHB requests that AI/AN IHS beneficiaries not be burdened to provide any tribal enrollment documentation to enroll in Medicaid and meet the exemption. NPAIHB further requests and supports AI/AN self-attestation for determination of IHS/tribal health program eligibility. Additionally, CMS must ensure that AI/ANs who are eligible for an exemption in Idaho, will not face barriers or lapses in care.

NPAIHB is expecting minimal administrative burden with implementation of the exemption of AI/AN IHS beneficiaries from work and community engagement requirements, but is seriously concerned about the administrative burden on tribal health facilities that serve non-IHS beneficiaries in implementing the requirements. NPAIHB has heard of concerns from benefits coordinators regarding an additional burden of monitoring these additional eligibility requirements. This request puts more stress on the benefits coordinators and will be more time consuming. NPAIHB requests that IDHW work with the Idaho Tribes to ensure a streamlined and simplified process for capturing work, volunteering, job training, or education of non-IHS beneficiaries eligible for Medicaid."
"The Northwest Portland Area Indian Health Board (NPAIHB) is appreciative and supportive of the exemption for AI/ANs eligible for IHS or tribal health program services (""IHS beneficiary"") under Idaho law and included in the Section 1115 demonstration waiver application. Since the Idaho law exemption is broader than AI/AN tribal members, we request the IDHW ensure inclusion of this broader definition to exempt all AI/AN IHS beneficiaries from Medicaid work and community engagement requirements in its 1115 submission. Tribes in other states that have submitted work requirement waivers have been forced to work with state Medicaid leadership to negotiate an exemption for AI/ANs. CMS must ensure that Idaho Tribes are not faced with an administrative burden or barriers in obtaining an exemption for all AI/AN IHS beneficiaries from Medicaid work and community engagement requirements in Idaho. This has been codified by state law and should be honored by CMS. NPAIHB requests that AI/AN IHS beneficiaries not be burdened to provide any tribal enrollment documentation to enroll in Medicaid and meet the exemption. NPAIHB further requests and supports AI/AN self-attestation for determination of IHS/tribal health program eligibility. Additionally, CMS must ensure that AI/ANs who are eligible for an exemption in Idaho, will not face barriers or lapses in care.

NPAIHB is expecting minimal administrative burden with implementation of the exemption of AI/AN IHS beneficiaries from work and community engagement requirements, but is seriously concerned about the administrative burden on tribal health facilities that serve non-IHS beneficiaries in implementing the requirements. NPAIHB has heard of concerns from benefits coordinators regarding an additional burden of monitoring these additional eligibility requirements. This request puts more stress on the benefits coordinators and will be more time consuming. NPAIHB requests that IDHW work with the Idaho Tribes to ensure a streamlined and simplified process for capturing work, volunteering, job training, or education of non-IHS beneficiaries eligible for Medicaid."

MEDICARE FOR ALL YOU DISGUSTING, GREEDY DIRTBAGS!
"As a resident of Idaho and someone personally affected by cystic fibrosis (CF), I urge you to reject the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver, which would implement work and community engagement requirements as a condition of Medicaid eligibility.



Cystic fibrosis is a life-threatening genetic disease that causes persistent lung infections and progressively limits the ability to breathe, often leading to respiratory failure. There is no known cure. As a complex, multi-system condition, CF requires targeted, highly specialized treatment and medications.



I can tell you firsthand that people with CF require access to affordable and adequate health coverage. Medicaid plays an important role in helping people with CF access the specialized care and treatments they need to lead healthy, fulfilling lives. While many Medicaid recipients work, people with CF may be unable to do so because of their health status or the amount of time they must spend on treatments and other activities to maintain or improve their health.



Additionally, I have serious concerns about the administrative challenges someone with CF could face in understanding and navigating these requirements and the exemption process. Recent experience in Arkansas showed that more than 18,000 Medicaid beneficiaries were disenrolled from the program because of their failure or inability to report their work hours. By Idahos own estimates, more than 16,000 individuals may lose Medicaid eligibility in just the first year due to inability to comply with these requirements.



Further, denying coverage because an individual is unable to satisfy just one month of work requirements is excessive for people with a life-threatening condition like cystic fibrosis. Removing coverage and access to life-saving care as a penalty for the inability to comply with work requirements can create serious challenges for people with CF that rely on Medicaid.



I urge you to reject Idahos work and community engagement requirements proposed in the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver. Your attention to this matter will help people with cystic fibrosis continue to have access to the quality, comprehensive care they need to live full and healthy lives."
"As a resident of Idaho and someone personally affected by cystic fibrosis (CF), I urge you to reject the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver, which would implement work and community engagement requirements as a condition of Medicaid eligibility.



Cystic fibrosis is a life-threatening genetic disease that causes persistent lung infections and progressively limits the ability to breathe, often leading to respiratory failure. There is no known cure. As a complex, multi-system condition, CF requires targeted, highly specialized treatment and medications.



I can tell you firsthand that people with CF require access to affordable and adequate health coverage. Medicaid plays an important role in helping people with CF access the specialized care and treatments they need to lead healthy, fulfilling lives. While many Medicaid recipients work, people with CF may be unable to do so because of their health status or the amount of time they must spend on treatments and other activities to maintain or improve their health.



Additionally, I have serious concerns about the administrative challenges someone with CF could face in understanding and navigating these requirements and the exemption process. Recent experience in Arkansas showed that more than 18,000 Medicaid beneficiaries were disenrolled from the program because of their failure or inability to report their work hours. By Idahos own estimates, more than 16,000 individuals may lose Medicaid eligibility in just the first year due to inability to comply with these requirements.



Further, denying coverage because an individual is unable to satisfy just one month of work requirements is excessive for people with a life-threatening condition like cystic fibrosis. Removing coverage and access to life-saving care as a penalty for the inability to comply with work requirements can create serious challenges for people with CF that rely on Medicaid.



I urge you to reject Idahos work and community engagement requirements proposed in the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver. Your attention to this matter will help people with cystic fibrosis continue to have access to the quality, comprehensive care they need to live full and healthy lives."
"As a resident of Idaho and someone personally affected by cystic fibrosis (CF), I urge you to reject the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver, which would implement work and community engagement requirements as a condition of Medicaid eligibility.



Cystic fibrosis is a life-threatening genetic disease that causes persistent lung infections and progressively limits the ability to breathe, often leading to respiratory failure. There is no known cure. As a complex, multi-system condition, CF requires targeted, highly specialized treatment and medications.



I can tell you firsthand that people with CF require access to affordable and adequate health coverage. Medicaid plays an important role in helping people with CF access the specialized care and treatments they need to lead healthy, fulfilling lives. While many Medicaid recipients work, people with CF may be unable to do so because of their health status or the amount of time they must spend on treatments and other activities to maintain or improve their health.



Additionally, I have serious concerns about the administrative challenges someone with CF could face in understanding and navigating these requirements and the exemption process. Recent experience in Arkansas showed that more than 18,000 Medicaid beneficiaries were disenrolled from the program because of their failure or inability to report their work hours. By Idahos own estimates, more than 16,000 individuals may lose Medicaid eligibility in just the first year due to inability to comply with these requirements.



Further, denying coverage because an individual is unable to satisfy just one month of work requirements is excessive for people with a life-threatening condition like cystic fibrosis. Removing coverage and access to life-saving care as a penalty for the inability to comply with work requirements can create serious challenges for people with CF that rely on Medicaid.



I urge you to reject Idahos work and community engagement requirements proposed in the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver. Your attention to this matter will help people with cystic fibrosis continue to have access to the quality, comprehensive care they need to live full and healthy lives."
"As a resident of Idaho and someone personally affected by cystic fibrosis (CF), I urge you to reject the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver, which would implement work and community engagement requirements as a condition of Medicaid eligibility.



Cystic fibrosis is a life-threatening genetic disease that causes persistent lung infections and progressively limits the ability to breathe, often leading to respiratory failure. There is no known cure. As a complex, multi-system condition, CF requires targeted, highly specialized treatment and medications.



I can tell you firsthand that people with CF require access to affordable and adequate health coverage. Medicaid plays an important role in helping people with CF access the specialized care and treatments they need to lead healthy, fulfilling lives. While many Medicaid recipients work, people with CF may be unable to do so because of their health status or the amount of time they must spend on treatments and other activities to maintain or improve their health.



Additionally, I have serious concerns about the administrative challenges someone with CF could face in understanding and navigating these requirements and the exemption process. Recent experience in Arkansas showed that more than 18,000 Medicaid beneficiaries were disenrolled from the program because of their failure or inability to report their work hours. By Idahos own estimates, more than 16,000 individuals may lose Medicaid eligibility in just the first year due to inability to comply with these requirements.



Further, denying coverage because an individual is unable to satisfy just one month of work requirements is excessive for people with a life-threatening condition like cystic fibrosis. Removing coverage and access to life-saving care as a penalty for the inability to comply with work requirements can create serious challenges for people with CF that rely on Medicaid.



I urge you to reject Idahos work and community engagement requirements proposed in the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver. Your attention to this matter will help people with cystic fibrosis continue to have access to the quality, comprehensive care they need to live full and healthy lives."
"As a resident of Idaho and someone personally affected by cystic fibrosis (CF), I urge you to reject the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver, which would implement work and community engagement requirements as a condition of Medicaid eligibility.



Cystic fibrosis is a life-threatening genetic disease that causes persistent lung infections and progressively limits the ability to breathe, often leading to respiratory failure. There is no known cure. As a complex, multi-system condition, CF requires targeted, highly specialized treatment and medications.



I can tell you firsthand that people with CF require access to affordable and adequate health coverage. Medicaid plays an important role in helping people with CF access the specialized care and treatments they need to lead healthy, fulfilling lives. While many Medicaid recipients work, people with CF may be unable to do so because of their health status or the amount of time they must spend on treatments and other activities to maintain or improve their health.



Additionally, I have serious concerns about the administrative challenges someone with CF could face in understanding and navigating these requirements and the exemption process. Recent experience in Arkansas showed that more than 18,000 Medicaid beneficiaries were disenrolled from the program because of their failure or inability to report their work hours. By Idahos own estimates, more than 16,000 individuals may lose Medicaid eligibility in just the first year due to inability to comply with these requirements.



Further, denying coverage because an individual is unable to satisfy just one month of work requirements is excessive for people with a life-threatening condition like cystic fibrosis. Removing coverage and access to life-saving care as a penalty for the inability to comply with work requirements can create serious challenges for people with CF that rely on Medicaid.



I urge you to reject Idahos work and community engagement requirements proposed in the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver. Your attention to this matter will help people with cystic fibrosis continue to have access to the quality, comprehensive care they need to live full and healthy lives."
"As a resident of Idaho and someone personally affected by cystic fibrosis (CF), I urge you to reject the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver, which would implement work and community engagement requirements as a condition of Medicaid eligibility.



Cystic fibrosis is a life-threatening genetic disease that causes persistent lung infections and progressively limits the ability to breathe, often leading to respiratory failure. There is no known cure. As a complex, multi-system condition, CF requires targeted, highly specialized treatment and medications.



I can tell you firsthand that people with CF require access to affordable and adequate health coverage. Medicaid plays an important role in helping people with CF access the specialized care and treatments they need to lead healthy, fulfilling lives. While many Medicaid recipients work, people with CF may be unable to do so because of their health status or the amount of time they must spend on treatments and other activities to maintain or improve their health.



Additionally, I have serious concerns about the administrative challenges someone with CF could face in understanding and navigating these requirements and the exemption process. Recent experience in Arkansas showed that more than 18,000 Medicaid beneficiaries were disenrolled from the program because of their failure or inability to report their work hours. By Idahos own estimates, more than 16,000 individuals may lose Medicaid eligibility in just the first year due to inability to comply with these requirements.



Further, denying coverage because an individual is unable to satisfy just one month of work requirements is excessive for people with a life-threatening condition like cystic fibrosis. Removing coverage and access to life-saving care as a penalty for the inability to comply with work requirements can create serious challenges for people with CF that rely on Medicaid.



I urge you to reject Idahos work and community engagement requirements proposed in the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver. Your attention to this matter will help people with cystic fibrosis continue to have access to the quality, comprehensive care they need to live full and healthy lives."
"As a resident of Idaho and someone personally affected by cystic fibrosis (CF), I urge you to reject the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver, which would implement work and community engagement requirements as a condition of Medicaid eligibility.



Cystic fibrosis is a life-threatening genetic disease that causes persistent lung infections and progressively limits the ability to breathe, often leading to respiratory failure. There is no known cure. As a complex, multi-system condition, CF requires targeted, highly specialized treatment and medications.



I can tell you firsthand that people with CF require access to affordable and adequate health coverage. Medicaid plays an important role in helping people with CF access the specialized care and treatments they need to lead healthy, fulfilling lives. While many Medicaid recipients work, people with CF may be unable to do so because of their health status or the amount of time they must spend on treatments and other activities to maintain or improve their health.



Additionally, I have serious concerns about the administrative challenges someone with CF could face in understanding and navigating these requirements and the exemption process. Recent experience in Arkansas showed that more than 18,000 Medicaid beneficiaries were disenrolled from the program because of their failure or inability to report their work hours. By Idahos own estimates, more than 16,000 individuals may lose Medicaid eligibility in just the first year due to inability to comply with these requirements.



Further, denying coverage because an individual is unable to satisfy just one month of work requirements is excessive for people with a life-threatening condition like cystic fibrosis. Removing coverage and access to life-saving care as a penalty for the inability to comply with work requirements can create serious challenges for people with CF that rely on Medicaid.



I urge you to reject Idahos work and community engagement requirements proposed in the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver. Your attention to this matter will help people with cystic fibrosis continue to have access to the quality, comprehensive care they need to live full and healthy lives."
"As a resident of Idaho and someone personally affected by cystic fibrosis (CF), I urge you to reject the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver, which would implement work and community engagement requirements as a condition of Medicaid eligibility.



Cystic fibrosis is a life-threatening genetic disease that causes persistent lung infections and progressively limits the ability to breathe, often leading to respiratory failure. There is no known cure. As a complex, multi-system condition, CF requires targeted, highly specialized treatment and medications.



I can tell you firsthand that people with CF require access to affordable and adequate health coverage. Medicaid plays an important role in helping people with CF access the specialized care and treatments they need to lead healthy, fulfilling lives. While many Medicaid recipients work, people with CF may be unable to do so because of their health status or the amount of time they must spend on treatments and other activities to maintain or improve their health.



Additionally, I have serious concerns about the administrative challenges someone with CF could face in understanding and navigating these requirements and the exemption process. Recent experience in Arkansas showed that more than 18,000 Medicaid beneficiaries were disenrolled from the program because of their failure or inability to report their work hours. By Idahos own estimates, more than 16,000 individuals may lose Medicaid eligibility in just the first year due to inability to comply with these requirements.



Further, denying coverage because an individual is unable to satisfy just one month of work requirements is excessive for people with a life-threatening condition like cystic fibrosis. Removing coverage and access to life-saving care as a penalty for the inability to comply with work requirements can create serious challenges for people with CF that rely on Medicaid.



I urge you to reject Idahos work and community engagement requirements proposed in the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver. Your attention to this matter will help people with cystic fibrosis continue to have access to the quality, comprehensive care they need to live full and healthy lives."
"As a resident of Idaho and someone personally affected by cystic fibrosis (CF), I urge you to reject the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver, which would implement work and community engagement requirements as a condition of Medicaid eligibility.



Cystic fibrosis is a life-threatening genetic disease that causes persistent lung infections and progressively limits the ability to breathe, often leading to respiratory failure. There is no known cure. As a complex, multi-system condition, CF requires targeted, highly specialized treatment and medications.



I can tell you firsthand that people with CF require access to affordable and adequate health coverage. Medicaid plays an important role in helping people with CF access the specialized care and treatments they need to lead healthy, fulfilling lives. While many Medicaid recipients work, people with CF may be unable to do so because of their health status or the amount of time they must spend on treatments and other activities to maintain or improve their health.



Additionally, I have serious concerns about the administrative challenges someone with CF could face in understanding and navigating these requirements and the exemption process. Recent experience in Arkansas showed that more than 18,000 Medicaid beneficiaries were disenrolled from the program because of their failure or inability to report their work hours. By Idahos own estimates, more than 16,000 individuals may lose Medicaid eligibility in just the first year due to inability to comply with these requirements.



Further, denying coverage because an individual is unable to satisfy just one month of work requirements is excessive for people with a life-threatening condition like cystic fibrosis. Removing coverage and access to life-saving care as a penalty for the inability to comply with work requirements can create serious challenges for people with CF that rely on Medicaid.



I urge you to reject Idahos work and community engagement requirements proposed in the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver. Your attention to this matter will help people with cystic fibrosis continue to have access to the quality, comprehensive care they need to live full and healthy lives."
"As a resident of Idaho and someone personally affected by cystic fibrosis (CF), I urge you to reject the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver, which would implement work and community engagement requirements as a condition of Medicaid eligibility.



Cystic fibrosis is a life-threatening genetic disease that causes persistent lung infections and progressively limits the ability to breathe, often leading to respiratory failure. There is no known cure. As a complex, multi-system condition, CF requires targeted, highly specialized treatment and medications.



I can tell you firsthand that people with CF require access to affordable and adequate health coverage. Medicaid plays an important role in helping people with CF access the specialized care and treatments they need to lead healthy, fulfilling lives. While many Medicaid recipients work, people with CF may be unable to do so because of their health status or the amount of time they must spend on treatments and other activities to maintain or improve their health.



Additionally, I have serious concerns about the administrative challenges someone with CF could face in understanding and navigating these requirements and the exemption process. Recent experience in Arkansas showed that more than 18,000 Medicaid beneficiaries were disenrolled from the program because of their failure or inability to report their work hours. By Idahos own estimates, more than 16,000 individuals may lose Medicaid eligibility in just the first year due to inability to comply with these requirements.



Further, denying coverage because an individual is unable to satisfy just one month of work requirements is excessive for people with a life-threatening condition like cystic fibrosis. Removing coverage and access to life-saving care as a penalty for the inability to comply with work requirements can create serious challenges for people with CF that rely on Medicaid.



I urge you to reject Idahos work and community engagement requirements proposed in the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver. Your attention to this matter will help people with cystic fibrosis continue to have access to the quality, comprehensive care they need to live full and healthy lives."
"As a resident of Idaho and someone personally affected by cystic fibrosis (CF), I urge you to reject the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver, which would implement work and community engagement requirements as a condition of Medicaid eligibility.



Cystic fibrosis is a life-threatening genetic disease that causes persistent lung infections and progressively limits the ability to breathe, often leading to respiratory failure. There is no known cure. As a complex, multi-system condition, CF requires targeted, highly specialized treatment and medications.



I can tell you firsthand that people with CF require access to affordable and adequate health coverage. Medicaid plays an important role in helping people with CF access the specialized care and treatments they need to lead healthy, fulfilling lives. While many Medicaid recipients work, people with CF may be unable to do so because of their health status or the amount of time they must spend on treatments and other activities to maintain or improve their health.



Additionally, I have serious concerns about the administrative challenges someone with CF could face in understanding and navigating these requirements and the exemption process. Recent experience in Arkansas showed that more than 18,000 Medicaid beneficiaries were disenrolled from the program because of their failure or inability to report their work hours. By Idahos own estimates, more than 16,000 individuals may lose Medicaid eligibility in just the first year due to inability to comply with these requirements.



Further, denying coverage because an individual is unable to satisfy just one month of work requirements is excessive for people with a life-threatening condition like cystic fibrosis. Removing coverage and access to life-saving care as a penalty for the inability to comply with work requirements can create serious challenges for people with CF that rely on Medicaid.



I urge you to reject Idahos work and community engagement requirements proposed in the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver. Your attention to this matter will help people with cystic fibrosis continue to have access to the quality, comprehensive care they need to live full and healthy lives."
"As a resident of Idaho and someone personally affected by cystic fibrosis (CF), I urge you to reject the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver, which would implement work and community engagement requirements as a condition of Medicaid eligibility.



Cystic fibrosis is a life-threatening genetic disease that causes persistent lung infections and progressively limits the ability to breathe, often leading to respiratory failure. There is no known cure. As a complex, multi-system condition, CF requires targeted, highly specialized treatment and medications.



I can tell you firsthand that people with CF require access to affordable and adequate health coverage. Medicaid plays an important role in helping people with CF access the specialized care and treatments they need to lead healthy, fulfilling lives. While many Medicaid recipients work, people with CF may be unable to do so because of their health status or the amount of time they must spend on treatments and other activities to maintain or improve their health.



Additionally, I have serious concerns about the administrative challenges someone with CF could face in understanding and navigating these requirements and the exemption process. Recent experience in Arkansas showed that more than 18,000 Medicaid beneficiaries were disenrolled from the program because of their failure or inability to report their work hours. By Idahos own estimates, more than 16,000 individuals may lose Medicaid eligibility in just the first year due to inability to comply with these requirements.



Further, denying coverage because an individual is unable to satisfy just one month of work requirements is excessive for people with a life-threatening condition like cystic fibrosis. Removing coverage and access to life-saving care as a penalty for the inability to comply with work requirements can create serious challenges for people with CF that rely on Medicaid.



I urge you to reject Idahos work and community engagement requirements proposed in the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver. Your attention to this matter will help people with cystic fibrosis continue to have access to the quality, comprehensive care they need to live full and healthy lives."
"As a resident of Idaho and someone personally affected by cystic fibrosis (CF), I urge you to reject the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver, which would implement work and community engagement requirements as a condition of Medicaid eligibility.



Cystic fibrosis is a life-threatening genetic disease that causes persistent lung infections and progressively limits the ability to breathe, often leading to respiratory failure. There is no known cure. As a complex, multi-system condition, CF requires targeted, highly specialized treatment and medications.



I can tell you firsthand that people with CF require access to affordable and adequate health coverage. Medicaid plays an important role in helping people with CF access the specialized care and treatments they need to lead healthy, fulfilling lives. While many Medicaid recipients work, people with CF may be unable to do so because of their health status or the amount of time they must spend on treatments and other activities to maintain or improve their health.



Additionally, I have serious concerns about the administrative challenges someone with CF could face in understanding and navigating these requirements and the exemption process. Recent experience in Arkansas showed that more than 18,000 Medicaid beneficiaries were disenrolled from the program because of their failure or inability to report their work hours. By Idahos own estimates, more than 16,000 individuals may lose Medicaid eligibility in just the first year due to inability to comply with these requirements.



Further, denying coverage because an individual is unable to satisfy just one month of work requirements is excessive for people with a life-threatening condition like cystic fibrosis. Removing coverage and access to life-saving care as a penalty for the inability to comply with work requirements can create serious challenges for people with CF that rely on Medicaid.



I urge you to reject Idahos work and community engagement requirements proposed in the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver. Your attention to this matter will help people with cystic fibrosis continue to have access to the quality, comprehensive care they need to live full and healthy lives."
"As a resident of Idaho and someone personally affected by cystic fibrosis (CF), I urge you to reject the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver, which would implement work and community engagement requirements as a condition of Medicaid eligibility.



Cystic fibrosis is a life-threatening genetic disease that causes persistent lung infections and progressively limits the ability to breathe, often leading to respiratory failure. There is no known cure. As a complex, multi-system condition, CF requires targeted, highly specialized treatment and medications.



I can tell you firsthand that people with CF require access to affordable and adequate health coverage. Medicaid plays an important role in helping people with CF access the specialized care and treatments they need to lead healthy, fulfilling lives. While many Medicaid recipients work, people with CF may be unable to do so because of their health status or the amount of time they must spend on treatments and other activities to maintain or improve their health.



Additionally, I have serious concerns about the administrative challenges someone with CF could face in understanding and navigating these requirements and the exemption process. Recent experience in Arkansas showed that more than 18,000 Medicaid beneficiaries were disenrolled from the program because of their failure or inability to report their work hours. By Idahos own estimates, more than 16,000 individuals may lose Medicaid eligibility in just the first year due to inability to comply with these requirements.



Further, denying coverage because an individual is unable to satisfy just one month of work requirements is excessive for people with a life-threatening condition like cystic fibrosis. Removing coverage and access to life-saving care as a penalty for the inability to comply with work requirements can create serious challenges for people with CF that rely on Medicaid.



I urge you to reject Idahos work and community engagement requirements proposed in the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver. Your attention to this matter will help people with cystic fibrosis continue to have access to the quality, comprehensive care they need to live full and healthy lives."
Please decline the Idaho Medicaid Reform Waiver submitted by Idaho legislators. This waiver request is contrary to the will of the people of Idaho who had to create a referendum in order to expand Medicaid under the ACA which provides healthcare to our people who fall into the coverage gap. Many Idahoans have suffered death, disability, medical bankruptcy, job loss, and more due to lack of healthcare that could have been had if our legislators had adopted the Medicaid expansion when it first became available. This waiver request will not help the health of those who are now available for Medicaid. Many Idahoans have difficulties with everyday life, live in rural areas that do not have broadband access which greatly affect educational and employment opportunities, have unreliable transportation, are working seasonal jobs, have difficulty maintaining consistent employment, do not want to go to school, and will have problems consistently filling out the paperwork required to keep healthcare coverage which then puts them back into the uninsured population. We, the people of Idaho, want to help people help themselves. Healthcare coverage for this category of working poor will do that. Additionally, this waiver will require administrative costs that will not contribute to any improved healthcare outcomes. Thank you for allowing us this opportunity to comment on this waiver request.
I believe health care for all is a right, not a privilege only for those that can afford it.
"As a resident of Idaho and someone personally affected by cystic fibrosis (CF), I urge you to reject the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver, which would implement work and community engagement requirements as a condition of Medicaid eligibility.



Cystic fibrosis is a life-threatening genetic disease that causes persistent lung infections and progressively limits the ability to breathe, often leading to respiratory failure. There is no known cure. As a complex, multi-system condition, CF requires targeted, highly specialized treatment and medications.



I can tell you firsthand that people with CF require access to affordable and adequate health coverage. Medicaid plays an important role in helping people with CF access the specialized care and treatments they need to lead healthy, fulfilling lives. While many Medicaid recipients work, people with CF may be unable to do so because of their health status or the amount of time they must spend on treatments and other activities to maintain or improve their health.



Additionally, I have serious concerns about the administrative challenges someone with CF could face in understanding and navigating these requirements and the exemption process. Recent experience in Arkansas showed that more than 18,000 Medicaid beneficiaries were disenrolled from the program because of their failure or inability to report their work hours. By Idahos own estimates, more than 16,000 individuals may lose Medicaid eligibility in just the first year due to inability to comply with these requirements.



Further, denying coverage because an individual is unable to satisfy just one month of work requirements is excessive for people with a life-threatening condition like cystic fibrosis. Removing coverage and access to life-saving care as a penalty for the inability to comply with work requirements can create serious challenges for people with CF that rely on Medicaid.



I urge you to reject Idahos work and community engagement requirements proposed in the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver. Your attention to this matter will help people with cystic fibrosis continue to have access to the quality, comprehensive care they need to live full and healthy lives."
"As a resident of Idaho and someone personally affected by cystic fibrosis (CF), I urge you to reject the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver, which would implement work and community engagement requirements as a condition of Medicaid eligibility.



Cystic fibrosis is a life-threatening genetic disease that causes persistent lung infections and progressively limits the ability to breathe, often leading to respiratory failure. There is no known cure. As a complex, multi-system condition, CF requires targeted, highly specialized treatment and medications.



I can tell you firsthand that people with CF require access to affordable and adequate health coverage. Medicaid plays an important role in helping people with CF access the specialized care and treatments they need to lead healthy, fulfilling lives. While many Medicaid recipients work, people with CF may be unable to do so because of their health status or the amount of time they must spend on treatments and other activities to maintain or improve their health.



Additionally, I have serious concerns about the administrative challenges someone with CF could face in understanding and navigating these requirements and the exemption process. Recent experience in Arkansas showed that more than 18,000 Medicaid beneficiaries were disenrolled from the program because of their failure or inability to report their work hours. By Idahos own estimates, more than 16,000 individuals may lose Medicaid eligibility in just the first year due to inability to comply with these requirements.



Further, denying coverage because an individual is unable to satisfy just one month of work requirements is excessive for people with a life-threatening condition like cystic fibrosis. Removing coverage and access to life-saving care as a penalty for the inability to comply with work requirements can create serious challenges for people with CF that rely on Medicaid.



I urge you to reject Idahos work and community engagement requirements proposed in the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver. Your attention to this matter will help people with cystic fibrosis continue to have access to the quality, comprehensive care they need to live full and healthy lives."
"As a resident of Idaho and someone personally affected by cystic fibrosis (CF), I urge you to reject the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver, which would implement work and community engagement requirements as a condition of Medicaid eligibility.



Cystic fibrosis is a life-threatening genetic disease that causes persistent lung infections and progressively limits the ability to breathe, often leading to respiratory failure. There is no known cure. As a complex, multi-system condition, CF requires targeted, highly specialized treatment and medications.



I can tell you firsthand that people with CF require access to affordable and adequate health coverage. Medicaid plays an important role in helping people with CF access the specialized care and treatments they need to lead healthy, fulfilling lives. While many Medicaid recipients work, people with CF may be unable to do so because of their health status or the amount of time they must spend on treatments and other activities to maintain or improve their health.



Additionally, I have serious concerns about the administrative challenges someone with CF could face in understanding and navigating these requirements and the exemption process. Recent experience in Arkansas showed that more than 18,000 Medicaid beneficiaries were disenrolled from the program because of their failure or inability to report their work hours. By Idahos own estimates, more than 16,000 individuals may lose Medicaid eligibility in just the first year due to inability to comply with these requirements.



Further, denying coverage because an individual is unable to satisfy just one month of work requirements is excessive for people with a life-threatening condition like cystic fibrosis. Removing coverage and access to life-saving care as a penalty for the inability to comply with work requirements can create serious challenges for people with CF that rely on Medicaid.



I urge you to reject Idahos work and community engagement requirements proposed in the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver. Your attention to this matter will help people with cystic fibrosis continue to have access to the quality, comprehensive care they need to live full and healthy lives."
"As a resident of Idaho and someone personally affected by cystic fibrosis (CF), I urge you to reject the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver, which would implement work and community engagement requirements as a condition of Medicaid eligibility.



Cystic fibrosis is a life-threatening genetic disease that causes persistent lung infections and progressively limits the ability to breathe, often leading to respiratory failure. There is no known cure. As a complex, multi-system condition, CF requires targeted, highly specialized treatment and medications.



I can tell you firsthand that people with CF require access to affordable and adequate health coverage. Medicaid plays an important role in helping people with CF access the specialized care and treatments they need to lead healthy, fulfilling lives. While many Medicaid recipients work, people with CF may be unable to do so because of their health status or the amount of time they must spend on treatments and other activities to maintain or improve their health.



Additionally, I have serious concerns about the administrative challenges someone with CF could face in understanding and navigating these requirements and the exemption process. Recent experience in Arkansas showed that more than 18,000 Medicaid beneficiaries were disenrolled from the program because of their failure or inability to report their work hours. By Idahos own estimates, more than 16,000 individuals may lose Medicaid eligibility in just the first year due to inability to comply with these requirements.



Further, denying coverage because an individual is unable to satisfy just one month of work requirements is excessive for people with a life-threatening condition like cystic fibrosis. Removing coverage and access to life-saving care as a penalty for the inability to comply with work requirements can create serious challenges for people with CF that rely on Medicaid.



I urge you to reject Idahos work and community engagement requirements proposed in the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver. Your attention to this matter will help people with cystic fibrosis continue to have access to the quality, comprehensive care they need to live full and healthy lives."
"As a resident of Idaho and someone personally affected by cystic fibrosis (CF), I urge you to reject the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver, which would implement work and community engagement requirements as a condition of Medicaid eligibility.



Cystic fibrosis is a life-threatening genetic disease that causes persistent lung infections and progressively limits the ability to breathe, often leading to respiratory failure. There is no known cure. As a complex, multi-system condition, CF requires targeted, highly specialized treatment and medications.



I can tell you firsthand that people with CF require access to affordable and adequate health coverage. Medicaid plays an important role in helping people with CF access the specialized care and treatments they need to lead healthy, fulfilling lives. While many Medicaid recipients work, people with CF may be unable to do so because of their health status or the amount of time they must spend on treatments and other activities to maintain or improve their health.



Additionally, I have serious concerns about the administrative challenges someone with CF could face in understanding and navigating these requirements and the exemption process. Recent experience in Arkansas showed that more than 18,000 Medicaid beneficiaries were disenrolled from the program because of their failure or inability to report their work hours. By Idahos own estimates, more than 16,000 individuals may lose Medicaid eligibility in just the first year due to inability to comply with these requirements.



Further, denying coverage because an individual is unable to satisfy just one month of work requirements is excessive for people with a life-threatening condition like cystic fibrosis. Removing coverage and access to life-saving care as a penalty for the inability to comply with work requirements can create serious challenges for people with CF that rely on Medicaid.



I urge you to reject Idahos work and community engagement requirements proposed in the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver. Your attention to this matter will help people with cystic fibrosis continue to have access to the quality, comprehensive care they need to live full and healthy lives."
"As a resident of Idaho and someone personally affected by cystic fibrosis (CF), I urge you to reject the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver, which would implement work and community engagement requirements as a condition of Medicaid eligibility.



Cystic fibrosis is a life-threatening genetic disease that causes persistent lung infections and progressively limits the ability to breathe, often leading to respiratory failure. There is no known cure. As a complex, multi-system condition, CF requires targeted, highly specialized treatment and medications.



I can tell you firsthand that people with CF require access to affordable and adequate health coverage. Medicaid plays an important role in helping people with CF access the specialized care and treatments they need to lead healthy, fulfilling lives. While many Medicaid recipients work, people with CF may be unable to do so because of their health status or the amount of time they must spend on treatments and other activities to maintain or improve their health.



Additionally, I have serious concerns about the administrative challenges someone with CF could face in understanding and navigating these requirements and the exemption process. Recent experience in Arkansas showed that more than 18,000 Medicaid beneficiaries were disenrolled from the program because of their failure or inability to report their work hours. By Idahos own estimates, more than 16,000 individuals may lose Medicaid eligibility in just the first year due to inability to comply with these requirements.



Further, denying coverage because an individual is unable to satisfy just one month of work requirements is excessive for people with a life-threatening condition like cystic fibrosis. Removing coverage and access to life-saving care as a penalty for the inability to comply with work requirements can create serious challenges for people with CF that rely on Medicaid.



I urge you to reject Idahos work and community engagement requirements proposed in the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver. Your attention to this matter will help people with cystic fibrosis continue to have access to the quality, comprehensive care they need to live full and healthy lives."
"As a resident of Idaho and someone personally affected by cystic fibrosis (CF), I urge you to reject the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver, which would implement work and community engagement requirements as a condition of Medicaid eligibility.



Cystic fibrosis is a life-threatening genetic disease that causes persistent lung infections and progressively limits the ability to breathe, often leading to respiratory failure. There is no known cure. As a complex, multi-system condition, CF requires targeted, highly specialized treatment and medications.



I can tell you firsthand that people with CF require access to affordable and adequate health coverage. Medicaid plays an important role in helping people with CF access the specialized care and treatments they need to lead healthy, fulfilling lives. While many Medicaid recipients work, people with CF may be unable to do so because of their health status or the amount of time they must spend on treatments and other activities to maintain or improve their health.



Additionally, I have serious concerns about the administrative challenges someone with CF could face in understanding and navigating these requirements and the exemption process. Recent experience in Arkansas showed that more than 18,000 Medicaid beneficiaries were disenrolled from the program because of their failure or inability to report their work hours. By Idahos own estimates, more than 16,000 individuals may lose Medicaid eligibility in just the first year due to inability to comply with these requirements.



Further, denying coverage because an individual is unable to satisfy just one month of work requirements is excessive for people with a life-threatening condition like cystic fibrosis. Removing coverage and access to life-saving care as a penalty for the inability to comply with work requirements can create serious challenges for people with CF that rely on Medicaid.



I urge you to reject Idahos work and community engagement requirements proposed in the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver. Your attention to this matter will help people with cystic fibrosis continue to have access to the quality, comprehensive care they need to live full and healthy lives."
"As a resident of Idaho and someone personally affected by cystic fibrosis (CF), I urge you to reject the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver, which would implement work and community engagement requirements as a condition of Medicaid eligibility.



Cystic fibrosis is a life-threatening genetic disease that causes persistent lung infections and progressively limits the ability to breathe, often leading to respiratory failure. There is no known cure. As a complex, multi-system condition, CF requires targeted, highly specialized treatment and medications.



I can tell you firsthand that people with CF require access to affordable and adequate health coverage. Medicaid plays an important role in helping people with CF access the specialized care and treatments they need to lead healthy, fulfilling lives. While many Medicaid recipients work, people with CF may be unable to do so because of their health status or the amount of time they must spend on treatments and other activities to maintain or improve their health.



Additionally, I have serious concerns about the administrative challenges someone with CF could face in understanding and navigating these requirements and the exemption process. Recent experience in Arkansas showed that more than 18,000 Medicaid beneficiaries were disenrolled from the program because of their failure or inability to report their work hours. By Idahos own estimates, more than 16,000 individuals may lose Medicaid eligibility in just the first year due to inability to comply with these requirements.



Further, denying coverage because an individual is unable to satisfy just one month of work requirements is excessive for people with a life-threatening condition like cystic fibrosis. Removing coverage and access to life-saving care as a penalty for the inability to comply with work requirements can create serious challenges for people with CF that rely on Medicaid.



I urge you to reject Idahos work and community engagement requirements proposed in the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver. Your attention to this matter will help people with cystic fibrosis continue to have access to the quality, comprehensive care they need to live full and healthy lives."
Please see the attached comment in opposition to the Idaho waiver application on behalf of the Tennessee Justice Center.
"As a resident of Idaho and someone personally affected by cystic fibrosis (CF), I urge you to reject the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver, which would implement work and community engagement requirements as a condition of Medicaid eligibility.



Cystic fibrosis is a life-threatening genetic disease that causes persistent lung infections and progressively limits the ability to breathe, often leading to respiratory failure. There is no known cure. As a complex, multi-system condition, CF requires targeted, highly specialized treatment and medications.



I can tell you firsthand that people with CF require access to affordable and adequate health coverage. Medicaid plays an important role in helping people with CF access the specialized care and treatments they need to lead healthy, fulfilling lives. While many Medicaid recipients work, people with CF may be unable to do so because of their health status or the amount of time they must spend on treatments and other activities to maintain or improve their health.



Additionally, I have serious concerns about the administrative challenges someone with CF could face in understanding and navigating these requirements and the exemption process. Recent experience in Arkansas showed that more than 18,000 Medicaid beneficiaries were disenrolled from the program because of their failure or inability to report their work hours. By Idahos own estimates, more than 16,000 individuals may lose Medicaid eligibility in just the first year due to inability to comply with these requirements.



Further, denying coverage because an individual is unable to satisfy just one month of work requirements is excessive for people with a life-threatening condition like cystic fibrosis. Removing coverage and access to life-saving care as a penalty for the inability to comply with work requirements can create serious challenges for people with CF that rely on Medicaid.



I urge you to reject Idahos work and community engagement requirements proposed in the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver. Your attention to this matter will help people with cystic fibrosis continue to have access to the quality, comprehensive care they need to live full and healthy lives."
"As a resident of Idaho and someone personally affected by cystic fibrosis (CF), I urge you to reject the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver, which would implement work and community engagement requirements as a condition of Medicaid eligibility.



Cystic fibrosis is a life-threatening genetic disease that causes persistent lung infections and progressively limits the ability to breathe, often leading to respiratory failure. There is no known cure. As a complex, multi-system condition, CF requires targeted, highly specialized treatment and medications.



I can tell you firsthand that people with CF require access to affordable and adequate health coverage. Medicaid plays an important role in helping people with CF access the specialized care and treatments they need to lead healthy, fulfilling lives. While many Medicaid recipients work, people with CF may be unable to do so because of their health status or the amount of time they must spend on treatments and other activities to maintain or improve their health.



Additionally, I have serious concerns about the administrative challenges someone with CF could face in understanding and navigating these requirements and the exemption process. Recent experience in Arkansas showed that more than 18,000 Medicaid beneficiaries were disenrolled from the program because of their failure or inability to report their work hours. By Idahos own estimates, more than 16,000 individuals may lose Medicaid eligibility in just the first year due to inability to comply with these requirements.



Further, denying coverage because an individual is unable to satisfy just one month of work requirements is excessive for people with a life-threatening condition like cystic fibrosis. Removing coverage and access to life-saving care as a penalty for the inability to comply with work requirements can create serious challenges for people with CF that rely on Medicaid.



I urge you to reject Idahos work and community engagement requirements proposed in the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver. Your attention to this matter will help people with cystic fibrosis continue to have access to the quality, comprehensive care they need to live full and healthy lives."
"Please see attached file for comments from the Idaho Hospital Association regarding the Idaho Medicaid Reform Waiver and work reporting requirements. Thank you.
Toni Lawson, Vice President Governmental Relations
Idaho Hospital Association"
"As a resident of Idaho and someone personally affected by cystic fibrosis (CF), I urge you to reject the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver, which would implement work and community engagement requirements as a condition of Medicaid eligibility.



Cystic fibrosis is a life-threatening genetic disease that causes persistent lung infections and progressively limits the ability to breathe, often leading to respiratory failure. There is no known cure. As a complex, multi-system condition, CF requires targeted, highly specialized treatment and medications.



I can tell you firsthand that people with CF require access to affordable and adequate health coverage. Medicaid plays an important role in helping people with CF access the specialized care and treatments they need to lead healthy, fulfilling lives. While many Medicaid recipients work, people with CF may be unable to do so because of their health status or the amount of time they must spend on treatments and other activities to maintain or improve their health.



Additionally, I have serious concerns about the administrative challenges someone with CF could face in understanding and navigating these requirements and the exemption process. Recent experience in Arkansas showed that more than 18,000 Medicaid beneficiaries were disenrolled from the program because of their failure or inability to report their work hours. By Idahos own estimates, more than 16,000 individuals may lose Medicaid eligibility in just the first year due to inability to comply with these requirements.



Further, denying coverage because an individual is unable to satisfy just one month of work requirements is excessive for people with a life-threatening condition like cystic fibrosis. Removing coverage and access to life-saving care as a penalty for the inability to comply with work requirements can create serious challenges for people with CF that rely on Medicaid.



I urge you to reject Idahos work and community engagement requirements proposed in the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver. Your attention to this matter will help people with cystic fibrosis continue to have access to the quality, comprehensive care they need to live full and healthy lives."
"As a resident of Idaho and someone personally affected by cystic fibrosis (CF), I urge you to reject the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver, which would implement work and community engagement requirements as a condition of Medicaid eligibility.



Cystic fibrosis is a life-threatening genetic disease that causes persistent lung infections and progressively limits the ability to breathe, often leading to respiratory failure. There is no known cure. As a complex, multi-system condition, CF requires targeted, highly specialized treatment and medications.



I can tell you firsthand that people with CF require access to affordable and adequate health coverage. Medicaid plays an important role in helping people with CF access the specialized care and treatments they need to lead healthy, fulfilling lives. While many Medicaid recipients work, people with CF may be unable to do so because of their health status or the amount of time they must spend on treatments and other activities to maintain or improve their health.



Additionally, I have serious concerns about the administrative challenges someone with CF could face in understanding and navigating these requirements and the exemption process. Recent experience in Arkansas showed that more than 18,000 Medicaid beneficiaries were disenrolled from the program because of their failure or inability to report their work hours. By Idahos own estimates, more than 16,000 individuals may lose Medicaid eligibility in just the first year due to inability to comply with these requirements.



Further, denying coverage because an individual is unable to satisfy just one month of work requirements is excessive for people with a life-threatening condition like cystic fibrosis. Removing coverage and access to life-saving care as a penalty for the inability to comply with work requirements can create serious challenges for people with CF that rely on Medicaid.



I urge you to reject Idahos work and community engagement requirements proposed in the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver. Your attention to this matter will help people with cystic fibrosis continue to have access to the quality, comprehensive care they need to live full and healthy lives."
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on the Idaho Medicaid Reform Waiver. On behalf of people with cystic fibrosis (CF), we write to express our serious concern that work and community engagement requirements are barriers to accessing the high-quality care that people with CF need. Please see attached for our full comments.
"As a resident of Idaho and someone personally affected by cystic fibrosis (CF), I urge you to reject the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver, which would implement work and community engagement requirements as a condition of Medicaid eligibility.



Cystic fibrosis is a life-threatening genetic disease that causes persistent lung infections and progressively limits the ability to breathe, often leading to respiratory failure. There is no known cure. As a complex, multi-system condition, CF requires targeted, highly specialized treatment and medications.



I can tell you firsthand that people with CF require access to affordable and adequate health coverage. Medicaid plays an important role in helping people with CF access the specialized care and treatments they need to lead healthy, fulfilling lives. While many Medicaid recipients work, people with CF may be unable to do so because of their health status or the amount of time they must spend on treatments and other activities to maintain or improve their health.



Additionally, I have serious concerns about the administrative challenges someone with CF could face in understanding and navigating these requirements and the exemption process. Recent experience in Arkansas showed that more than 18,000 Medicaid beneficiaries were disenrolled from the program because of their failure or inability to report their work hours. By Idahos own estimates, more than 16,000 individuals may lose Medicaid eligibility in just the first year due to inability to comply with these requirements.



Further, denying coverage because an individual is unable to satisfy just one month of work requirements is excessive for people with a life-threatening condition like cystic fibrosis. Removing coverage and access to life-saving care as a penalty for the inability to comply with work requirements can create serious challenges for people with CF that rely on Medicaid.



I urge you to reject Idahos work and community engagement requirements proposed in the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver. Your attention to this matter will help people with cystic fibrosis continue to have access to the quality, comprehensive care they need to live full and healthy lives."
"As a resident of Idaho and someone personally affected by cystic fibrosis (CF), I urge you to reject the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver, which would implement work and community engagement requirements as a condition of Medicaid eligibility.



Cystic fibrosis is a life-threatening genetic disease that causes persistent lung infections and progressively limits the ability to breathe, often leading to respiratory failure. There is no known cure. As a complex, multi-system condition, CF requires targeted, highly specialized treatment and medications.



I can tell you firsthand that people with CF require access to affordable and adequate health coverage. Medicaid plays an important role in helping people with CF access the specialized care and treatments they need to lead healthy, fulfilling lives. While many Medicaid recipients work, people with CF may be unable to do so because of their health status or the amount of time they must spend on treatments and other activities to maintain or improve their health.



Additionally, I have serious concerns about the administrative challenges someone with CF could face in understanding and navigating these requirements and the exemption process. Recent experience in Arkansas showed that more than 18,000 Medicaid beneficiaries were disenrolled from the program because of their failure or inability to report their work hours. By Idahos own estimates, more than 16,000 individuals may lose Medicaid eligibility in just the first year due to inability to comply with these requirements.



Further, denying coverage because an individual is unable to satisfy just one month of work requirements is excessive for people with a life-threatening condition like cystic fibrosis. Removing coverage and access to life-saving care as a penalty for the inability to comply with work requirements can create serious challenges for people with CF that rely on Medicaid.



I urge you to reject Idahos work and community engagement requirements proposed in the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver. Your attention to this matter will help people with cystic fibrosis continue to have access to the quality, comprehensive care they need to live full and healthy lives."
Please find attached: Official comments on Idaho's 1115 application to impose work requirements on Idaho's voter approved Medicaid expansion; an Index of resources used in the completion of these comments; a file with many of the original documents cited in our comments; comments on behalf of Idahoans who would be directly harmed by the proposed work requirements; comments of over 1500 Idahoans opposing work requirements. We ask that all of these materials be added to the official federal record on this application. Please confirm receipt of these comments. Thank you. Liz Woodruff Assistant Director Idaho Voices for Children
Attached are comments from the National Health Law Program on Idaho's Medicaid Reform Waiver proposal.
"As a resident of Idaho and someone personally affected by cystic fibrosis (CF), I urge you to reject the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver, which would implement work and community engagement requirements as a condition of Medicaid eligibility.



Cystic fibrosis is a life-threatening genetic disease that causes persistent lung infections and progressively limits the ability to breathe, often leading to respiratory failure. There is no known cure. As a complex, multi-system condition, CF requires targeted, highly specialized treatment and medications.



I can tell you firsthand that people with CF require access to affordable and adequate health coverage. Medicaid plays an important role in helping people with CF access the specialized care and treatments they need to lead healthy, fulfilling lives. While many Medicaid recipients work, people with CF may be unable to do so because of their health status or the amount of time they must spend on treatments and other activities to maintain or improve their health.



Additionally, I have serious concerns about the administrative challenges someone with CF could face in understanding and navigating these requirements and the exemption process. Recent experience in Arkansas showed that more than 18,000 Medicaid beneficiaries were disenrolled from the program because of their failure or inability to report their work hours. By Idahos own estimates, more than 16,000 individuals may lose Medicaid eligibility in just the first year due to inability to comply with these requirements.



Further, denying coverage because an individual is unable to satisfy just one month of work requirements is excessive for people with a life-threatening condition like cystic fibrosis. Removing coverage and access to life-saving care as a penalty for the inability to comply with work requirements can create serious challenges for people with CF that rely on Medicaid.



I urge you to reject Idahos work and community engagement requirements proposed in the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver. Your attention to this matter will help people with cystic fibrosis continue to have access to the quality, comprehensive care they need to live full and healthy lives."
"As a resident of Idaho and someone personally affected by cystic fibrosis (CF), I urge you to reject the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver, which would implement work and community engagement requirements as a condition of Medicaid eligibility.



Cystic fibrosis is a life-threatening genetic disease that causes persistent lung infections and progressively limits the ability to breathe, often leading to respiratory failure. There is no known cure. As a complex, multi-system condition, CF requires targeted, highly specialized treatment and medications.



I can tell you firsthand that people with CF require access to affordable and adequate health coverage. Medicaid plays an important role in helping people with CF access the specialized care and treatments they need to lead healthy, fulfilling lives. While many Medicaid recipients work, people with CF may be unable to do so because of their health status or the amount of time they must spend on treatments and other activities to maintain or improve their health.



Additionally, I have serious concerns about the administrative challenges someone with CF could face in understanding and navigating these requirements and the exemption process. Recent experience in Arkansas showed that more than 18,000 Medicaid beneficiaries were disenrolled from the program because of their failure or inability to report their work hours. By Idahos own estimates, more than 16,000 individuals may lose Medicaid eligibility in just the first year due to inability to comply with these requirements.



Further, denying coverage because an individual is unable to satisfy just one month of work requirements is excessive for people with a life-threatening condition like cystic fibrosis. Removing coverage and access to life-saving care as a penalty for the inability to comply with work requirements can create serious challenges for people with CF that rely on Medicaid.



I urge you to reject Idahos work and community engagement requirements proposed in the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver. Your attention to this matter will help people with cystic fibrosis continue to have access to the quality, comprehensive care they need to live full and healthy lives."
"As a resident of Idaho and someone personally affected by cystic fibrosis (CF), I urge you to reject the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver, which would implement work and community engagement requirements as a condition of Medicaid eligibility.



Cystic fibrosis is a life-threatening genetic disease that causes persistent lung infections and progressively limits the ability to breathe, often leading to respiratory failure. There is no known cure. As a complex, multi-system condition, CF requires targeted, highly specialized treatment and medications.



I can tell you firsthand that people with CF require access to affordable and adequate health coverage. Medicaid plays an important role in helping people with CF access the specialized care and treatments they need to lead healthy, fulfilling lives. While many Medicaid recipients work, people with CF may be unable to do so because of their health status or the amount of time they must spend on treatments and other activities to maintain or improve their health.



Additionally, I have serious concerns about the administrative challenges someone with CF could face in understanding and navigating these requirements and the exemption process. Recent experience in Arkansas showed that more than 18,000 Medicaid beneficiaries were disenrolled from the program because of their failure or inability to report their work hours. By Idahos own estimates, more than 16,000 individuals may lose Medicaid eligibility in just the first year due to inability to comply with these requirements.



Further, denying coverage because an individual is unable to satisfy just one month of work requirements is excessive for people with a life-threatening condition like cystic fibrosis. Removing coverage and access to life-saving care as a penalty for the inability to comply with work requirements can create serious challenges for people with CF that rely on Medicaid.



I urge you to reject Idahos work and community engagement requirements proposed in the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver. Your attention to this matter will help people with cystic fibrosis continue to have access to the quality, comprehensive care they need to live full and healthy lives."
"As a resident of Idaho and someone personally affected by cystic fibrosis (CF), I urge you to reject the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver, which would implement work and community engagement requirements as a condition of Medicaid eligibility.



Cystic fibrosis is a life-threatening genetic disease that causes persistent lung infections and progressively limits the ability to breathe, often leading to respiratory failure. There is no known cure. As a complex, multi-system condition, CF requires targeted, highly specialized treatment and medications.



I can tell you firsthand that people with CF require access to affordable and adequate health coverage. Medicaid plays an important role in helping people with CF access the specialized care and treatments they need to lead healthy, fulfilling lives. While many Medicaid recipients work, people with CF may be unable to do so because of their health status or the amount of time they must spend on treatments and other activities to maintain or improve their health.



Additionally, I have serious concerns about the administrative challenges someone with CF could face in understanding and navigating these requirements and the exemption process. Recent experience in Arkansas showed that more than 18,000 Medicaid beneficiaries were disenrolled from the program because of their failure or inability to report their work hours. By Idahos own estimates, more than 16,000 individuals may lose Medicaid eligibility in just the first year due to inability to comply with these requirements.



Further, denying coverage because an individual is unable to satisfy just one month of work requirements is excessive for people with a life-threatening condition like cystic fibrosis. Removing coverage and access to life-saving care as a penalty for the inability to comply with work requirements can create serious challenges for people with CF that rely on Medicaid.



I urge you to reject Idahos work and community engagement requirements proposed in the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver. Your attention to this matter will help people with cystic fibrosis continue to have access to the quality, comprehensive care they need to live full and healthy lives."
"As a resident of Idaho and someone personally affected by cystic fibrosis (CF), I urge you to reject the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver, which would implement work and community engagement requirements as a condition of Medicaid eligibility.



Cystic fibrosis is a life-threatening genetic disease that causes persistent lung infections and progressively limits the ability to breathe, often leading to respiratory failure. There is no known cure. As a complex, multi-system condition, CF requires targeted, highly specialized treatment and medications.



I can tell you firsthand that people with CF require access to affordable and adequate health coverage. Medicaid plays an important role in helping people with CF access the specialized care and treatments they need to lead healthy, fulfilling lives. While many Medicaid recipients work, people with CF may be unable to do so because of their health status or the amount of time they must spend on treatments and other activities to maintain or improve their health.



Additionally, I have serious concerns about the administrative challenges someone with CF could face in understanding and navigating these requirements and the exemption process. Recent experience in Arkansas showed that more than 18,000 Medicaid beneficiaries were disenrolled from the program because of their failure or inability to report their work hours. By Idahos own estimates, more than 16,000 individuals may lose Medicaid eligibility in just the first year due to inability to comply with these requirements.



Further, denying coverage because an individual is unable to satisfy just one month of work requirements is excessive for people with a life-threatening condition like cystic fibrosis. Removing coverage and access to life-saving care as a penalty for the inability to comply with work requirements can create serious challenges for people with CF that rely on Medicaid.



I urge you to reject Idahos work and community engagement requirements proposed in the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver. Your attention to this matter will help people with cystic fibrosis continue to have access to the quality, comprehensive care they need to live full and healthy lives."
"November 2, 2019

The Honorable Alex Azar
Secretary
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
200 Independence Avenue, SW
Washington, DC 20201

Re: Idaho Medicaid Reform Waiver: Section 1115 Medicaid Waiver Demonstration Project Application

Dear Secretary Azar:

Thank you for the opportunity to submit comments on Idaho's Medicaid Reform Waiver: Section 1115 Medicaid Waiver Demonstration Project Application on work reporting requirements. Please find attached comments submitted during the state comment period before submission of the application. We would note that an overwhelming majority of comments were in opposition to the work reporting requirements waiver, and yet the waiver was submitted with no changes, ignoring the concerns of the majority of Idahoans.

The unnecessary administrative burden the work reporting requirements puts on newly eligible Idahoans would prevent many from obtaining needed critical health care access. This administrative burden also falls to the state for costs associated with the requirement, diverting funds from the core goal of the Medicaid program, to provide health coverage to those without access to care. While the requirement creates an added burden, it does not assist in helping individuals find or maintain stable employment. In reality, it can hamper the ability of a person to maintain their employment when one month they are receiving appropriate medical care for a chronic condition, and the next month that treatment is cut off, the resulting health impact could cause someone to lose a job. This is in direct opposition to the purpose of both a work requirement and the Medicaid program.

We appreciate all efforts to increase access to health care for Idahoans, and strongly support the Medicaid Expansion efforts in Idaho. The waiver submitted by Idaho does not reflect the concerns and opposition from the people of Idaho, and ignores the reality it may cause for patients living with chronic and acute health conditions. For these reasons we ask that CMS reject the request for work reporting requirements, and support the better health of all Idahoans. Thank you for the opportunity to submit comments on the Idaho 1115 Medicaid Waiver."
"As a resident of Idaho and someone personally affected by cystic fibrosis (CF), I urge you to reject the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver, which would implement work and community engagement requirements as a condition of Medicaid eligibility.



Cystic fibrosis is a life-threatening genetic disease that causes persistent lung infections and progressively limits the ability to breathe, often leading to respiratory failure. There is no known cure. As a complex, multi-system condition, CF requires targeted, highly specialized treatment and medications.



I can tell you firsthand that people with CF require access to affordable and adequate health coverage. Medicaid plays an important role in helping people with CF access the specialized care and treatments they need to lead healthy, fulfilling lives. While many Medicaid recipients work, people with CF may be unable to do so because of their health status or the amount of time they must spend on treatments and other activities to maintain or improve their health.



Additionally, I have serious concerns about the administrative challenges someone with CF could face in understanding and navigating these requirements and the exemption process. Recent experience in Arkansas showed that more than 18,000 Medicaid beneficiaries were disenrolled from the program because of their failure or inability to report their work hours. By Idahos own estimates, more than 16,000 individuals may lose Medicaid eligibility in just the first year due to inability to comply with these requirements.



Further, denying coverage because an individual is unable to satisfy just one month of work requirements is excessive for people with a life-threatening condition like cystic fibrosis. Removing coverage and access to life-saving care as a penalty for the inability to comply with work requirements can create serious challenges for people with CF that rely on Medicaid.



I urge you to reject Idahos work and community engagement requirements proposed in the states 1115 Medicaid Reform Waiver. Your attention to this matter will help people with cystic fibrosis continue to have access to the quality, comprehensive care they need to live full and healthy lives."

The country needs a national water law and rigorous, enforceable water quality standards.

Large project development oversight, education and awareness for the general public, training standards for provincial and municipal regulators, environmental protection, marine life preservation and protection

Guiding the regulation of and education about products we use daily that end up polluting our water systems. If a harmful product doesn't come into our country, or at least if it isn't widespread, then we as consumers don't have the opportunity to make the wrong choice and pollute our water systems unknowingly. The next step in my mind would be education about which products are safest and most appropriate for our uses.

Policy development 
Education and training
Regulation and Enforcement 
Environmental protection

The Federal government should not be involved in the matter because it is provincial jurisdiction.

If all waterways were contained completely within provincial boundaries, Donald, I might agree.  But they're not.  What we need from our Federal Government is coordination among provinces.

Rick:  Water is provincial jurisdiction, so if two locations share water, they should talk about it themselves; there is no need for Federal supervision.  If you are such a big supporter of central control now, why did you support the local infringement on water?

Donald, water has been a provincial jurisdiction, but nothing is engraved in stone.  Federal involvement can provide coordination -- especially in watersheds which aren't entirely within any one province.  And local involvement can provide a grass-roots perspective.  It's all about working together and sharing resources.  The fact that this topic IS under discussion shows that there is some resolve to adapt a more cooperative and collaborative approach.

Rick:  The Covid 19 crisis illustrates why provincial jurisdiction has to be honoured in water management.  The crisis showed samples of good and bad management and we have the best models to learn from.  Putting water under  a single controller like the Feds will end up with a poorer system as illustrated in the cover crisis - the Feds did not close the borders soon enough,  and they could have prevented a whole lot of misery.

This is a difficult question because there are so many gaps and a single agency cannot fill them all. I would suggest that the governments with whom the long-term collaboration must occur (federal, provincial, Indigenous and municipal) should all be involved in the mandating of the new agency. It may be that he mandate is narrow in the early going but if it works there could be then agreement on extending its mandate. If collaboration is not possible on that question then it throws doubt on the likelihood of collaboration being successful after the agency is set up. I do not believe this will work if it is set up as just another federal entity. I think other models of collaborative governance should be examined before the agency is set up. the more there is agreement on the mandate of the agency, the more engagement and investment by each of the collaborating partners, the greater the probability of success. when I visited the Netherlands in 2013, there was a body called The Netherlands Water Partnership which was funded by all the partners who had a stake in the way water was managed in the Netherlands and how technology was exported. The staff comprised fewer than 50 people but their role was, as a relatively disinterested third party, to help resolve disputes. This is not a model for everything a new agency would be doing, but there are lessons from how it operated which could be learned.
Standards of water use and prevention of pollution (NOT after the spill redress) should have teeth and conviction to long term healthy change.

Development of a holistic water management guideline, creation and enforcement of regulations.

I was able to participate in the recent May webinar, which hosted a panel discussion on the need for and formation of a Canada Water Agency.  I am not convinced that a one agency approach at the federal level can and will address the complexity of the water challenges facing Canada.  As noted by the non-federal members of the panel, water challenges require a collaborative approach given the integrating dimension of water and the extremely broad scope that water has on our social, economic, spiritual, and environmental well-being.  

Once one considers the range of jurisdictional and constitutional roles and needs related to water as well as the emerging voice of indigenous nations, the concept of a Canada Water Agency seems to be at odds with the direction that Canada at the federal level needs to be progressing. As an example, I was somewhat surprised that the panel discussion lacked consideration, perspective, and input from the provincial level, as well as the education, NGO, and private sectors.  I would suggest that the education and private sectors will need to be engaged and their contribution recognised, if we are to truly develop an enlightened institutional context for sustainable water management in Canada.   

I believe that Canada federally must continue to move forward with an open and collaborative approach that facilitates shared responsibility for and stewardship of Canada's water resources.  All public and private parties have a contribution to make and the federal role and contribution is to ensure that the institutional context and foundation is in place to accommodate and facilitate these broad needs, perspectives, and contributions form the watershed level upwards.  The institutional context at the federal level must be one of national protocols, future-looking policy frameworks, and fostering responsive and collaborative contributions from all parties in the water and water-investment sectors.  

In concluding, I believe that a Canada Water Agency model would hinder progressive and adaptive water management innovation in Canada given the complex dimensions of water, would develop institutional bias and narrow the water discussion over the longer term due to constrained capacity, and would diminish the collective responsibilities and collaborative contributions of other key parties and all Canadians wrt to sustainable water management in Canada

Development of national standards and co-ordination of provincial enforcement, sampling, data collection and reporting to national standards.

We need national standards, regulations, oversight and enforcement in order to protect Canada's fresh water.  We need science based not politically based decision making for this essential environmental protection.

Determining research requirements and as a funding agency for public university examinations of the issues.

I haven't seen any comments about the Conservation Authorities that many provinces have that look after various watersheds or their work on flood control.
Most of these authorities have been around for decades and doing good work.
Have they been consulted?

I see the Canada Water Agency being another federal boondoggle of discussions, workshops, conferences, reports and recommendations, with no commitment, money or jurisdiction to implement them. The mandate as described by the Prime Minster is such a broad mandate as to be meaningless - "best ways to keep our water safe, clean and well-managed". I think we can all write the report on that right now. We already have a Lake Winnipeg Basin Program in Manitoba, while doing good work, it is far from sufficient to actually make even a dent in the actual issue of eutrophication of the Lake. Even MP Duguid will admit that. So while millions of dollars are spent it is a bandaid at best and creates false sense of accomplishment at worst. Don't want to see the same situation with a Canada Water Agency. 

Canada needs good data on water USE (or water "demand" if you prefer).  We do not have a centralized information source for water use for municipal, industrial and agricultural purposes, or stored in reservoirs.  We cannot manage water resources at local, river basin, provincial or inter-provincial scales without a better understanding of both water supply (essentially hydrology) and water demand.

I would start by having the existing water agencies live up to their responsibilities. Another agency could be the last thing water resource management needs.

Coordination amongst all of the stakeholders. Success will be limited though if the ultimate power and decisions remain with various jurisdictions.

Inland waters are primarily a matter of prov9ncial jurisdiction, so l don't think that a Canadian Water Agency should have any role in regulation or enforcement. I believe it can play a role in education, the advancement of science and coordination of provinces to guide them toward consistent approaches to water management. A federal agency could also support Canada's and the provinces' efforts to address cross-border issues with US governments.

I hope the water agency will act as a over/ encompassing body that keeps the direction of overall management, goals and regulations in check. This body should be viewing water issues through a multi-disciplinary lens, making sure that these larger issues are being dealt with. I hope the Agency will connect all levels of government, indigenous groups, non-profits and citizen scientist accordingly.

I would start by having the existing water agencies live up to their responsibilities. Another agency could be the last thing water resource management needs.

Coordination amongst all of the stakeholders. Success will be limited though if the ultimate power and decisions remain with various jurisdictions.

Inland waters are primarily a matter of prov9ncial jurisdiction, so l don't think that a Canadian Water Agency should have any role in regulation or enforcement. I believe it can play a role in education, the advancement of science and coordination of provinces to guide them toward consistent approaches to water management. A federal agency could also support Canada's and the provinces' efforts to address cross-border issues with US governments.

I hope the water agency will act as a over/ encompassing body that keeps the direction of overall management, goals and regulations in check. This body should be viewing water issues through a multi-disciplinary lens, making sure that these larger issues are being dealt with. I hope the Agency will connect all levels of government, indigenous groups, non-profits and citizen scientist accordingly.

If we were to create a Canada Water Agency it truly should be an agency at arm's length from government and have a focused mandate of steering water policy, water science, and water related actions with a future lens through collaboration with the broad range of water stakeholders engaged in education, research, implementation, management, and delivery of programs. The engagement must involve the local to international public institutions as well as the private sector.  It should be agile, effective, and accountable with a goal to ensuring knowledge and information are shared, best practices are embraced, and future water challenges are understood.  We need to move away from the hard structural approach to such a federal agency to one that is much more fluid and dynamic and can morph quickly as needed.

I would like to see the Canada Water Agency working towards giving water the rights of personhood. I would like to see the Great Lakes protected with the legal rights of a person. We need to fight for this.

exactly what others are saying, regulations with teeth, enforceable penalties for breaking the regulations, prioritizing fresh clean water for everyone for the future.  Investigating all back room deals with China that involve our water.

In part, the lack of a national water assessment is related to the silos between jurisdictions, agencies, researchers, and communities (including the public at large and First Nations communities).  The Canada Water Agency could use its role to break down these barriers towards specific and tangible goals.  I would encourage that a first goal would be a national water assessment, where all stakeholder groups work together to complete the assessment and assess the knowledge gaps.  Following that, the Canada Water Agency could assist in breaking down the silos and facilitate teams to address specific problems identified in the national water assessment.  In my opinion, one of the problems that will be encountered will be challenges accessing data at a national scale.  The Canada Water Agency could work with the different jurisdictions/agencies to create a centralized national open access database.

I see the need for a facilitator, science  and tool developer and an agency that can support Provinces in collecting the essential information necessary to truly understand fresh water characteristics and needs.  Not all Provinces have the funds and capability for monitoring their fresh water resources.
For example, there is a strong role for an entity that can help develop better science and science-based tools for understanding fresh water characteristics and for collecting data and developing information that is compatible and comparable across the various Canadian jurisdictions.  All Provinces and finer scale jurisdictions collect various types of information related to fresh water but in many cases they use different protocols and methodologies to collect this fundamental information and the information collected is fragmented and does not provide a full scope of understanding of their fresh water resources.  As a result, this information cannot be rolled up to the Provincial or National level to obtain a strong understanding of our fresh water resources or provide a jump off for development of management or restoration programs.  The closest we have is in the National gauge station network that collects data that can be compared and contrasted across watersheds and jurisdictions.  One major challenge is that not all major watersheds are sufficiently gauged nor do we tend to gauge headwaters so that we have little knowledge of the generation of water that flows into the larger systems.
Another key role of an agency would be in the training of professionals in fresh water science and management.  This would go a long way to harmonize the expertise in fresh water management across Canada.
A Canada Water Agency could also act as a science and technology synthesizer given that many other jurisdictions have worked to develop national agencies related to water and there may be things that we can learn from these other jurisdictions

I see a Canada Water Agency as setting water quality standards across the country, providing adequate funding to provincial agencies (which would allow the assessment and mitigation of water quality issues to be carried out by each province), and coordinating the effort of the different agencies working within each watershed.

Since water quality issues often span multiple provincial (and even international) borders, the Canada Water Agency should approach things from a watershed-specific perspective, and have authority to direct efforts from a national level.  

For example: It does not make sense, for Ontario to have one way of collecting data/water quality standards, Manitoba to have another, Saskatchewan another, and Alberta another, when the water quality of Lake Winnipeg is determined by what goes on in parts of all four provinces.  

We need a federal agency (i.e. a Canada Water Agency) to set regulations for the Lake Winnipeg watershed, and policy that will hold all users within that watershed to the same standard of practice, and allow for the same standard of data collection across the watershed so we have a clear handle on what challenges we face.  We need this agency to set a robust scientific strategy for data collection, and to coordinate efforts from all provincial agencies so that the data is coherent and can be compared across the watershed and over time.

As rivers and lakes cross provincial borders, there needs to be some federal oversight on water. As part of a watershed group, it is impossible to contact federal employees to involve them in the discussion, and ask about the federal role in the management of our water and the lands around it. The Canada Water Agency may be a route to provide contact, and have people designated to collaborate with different provincial organizations (watershed organizations, provincial governments, etc.)

Shine a light on all of our failures to protect our fish, our forests, our rivers, wetlands and aquifers.  Call out the various government agencies that turn a blind eye or fail to fund the "boots on the ground" or "wigs in the courts" to make sure that the interest or our grandchildren and their right to clean water and healthy ecosystems is held high above the short term profits and political cycles that reign today.
High profile blaming and shaming is the only thing that will force government and industry to clean up their acts.  Force agencies to make the laws and enforce them or the devastation will continue unabated.

Creating and implementing radical policies, holding government (local and federal), and industry accountable for water usage and waterway restoration. Work collaboratively with goverment. Implement indigenous nations suggestions on water stuardship.

To be a forum for knowledge gathering and sharing.  Perhaps being a provincial synergy group that develops recommended practices.  Ideally an arms length organization of the government that is free of political influence.  Regulation of freshwater resources should be provincial jurisdiction.  Canada does not need more regulation, it needs effective and efficient regulation.  I do not think our federal government has the best record for delivering effective or efficient regulation. The Canada Water Agency should not impede responsible development.

IMO, a Canadian Water Agency should work towards the development of a federal (or at least, pan-Canadian) platform for water data sharing and exploration, along with a multiparty agreement facilitating the adoption of standardized data formats, as well as support to small stakeholders to develop water monitoring schemes and training of data specialists. Such effort should gather universities, federal, territorial, and provincial agencies, watershed councils, communities. 
We do have data in Canada that could be leveraged towards IWRM; however, data availability is different from a region to one another, some communities don't have the technical and financial means to share what they have, researchers can be reluctant to share their data (even if funded by public money...), different formats make it difficult to create Canada-wide datasets...and so on; the list of issues is long.
For instance, it is shocking to not find in Canada a unique database of stream water temperature, an official fine-grained national watershed layer (equivalent HUC-12 in the US for instance), or that community source watersheds are not available in a GIS format. It impedes the development of many research projects that are more than needed in a context of uncertain and dangerous environmental change.
Examples from the US (e.g., CUASHI) or France (portail EauFrance) can provide inspiration. Creating such a platform with the support of numerous actors of the water sector would be a hell of an achievement!

CWA could facilitate water management across ecozones that typically cross political boundaries, but which are the natural unit for lake and stream districts.  Bespoke management strategies will be required for these zones, rather than a national set of criteria.  (target nutrient levels for the prairie grasslands would be completely inappropriate for boreal lakes; Ditto montane for coastal systems, etc.).

Bring a role of assessor and analyst to other departments (i.e Naitonal Energy Board, Health Canada projects that may not even Identify that their projects have significant impacts on water). A way to facilitate collaboration between ,multiple groups, including Indigenous leadership , on water management, and facilitate Indigenous water laws to intersect with conventional water regulations and policy currently applied.

Agriculture use of water is also a large issue. It would be great to have an Research and Development arm that helps to showcase best practices - i.e. Precision agriculture - the use of drone technology in Israel to monitor crop health and distribute water, small amounts of pest control to an individually diseased plant, not the entire crop. Also as a means to encourage broader applications of regenerative agriculture techniques by partnering with Ag Canada etc.

The CWA could be seated within the Department of the Environment and Climate Change Canada, and could undertake this proposed mandate by:

1.	Ensuring the alignment of activities and priorities with other agencies, departments of government, private organizations, corporations, and scientific and academic sources to understand problems, devise real-world solutions, and to coordinate financing for certain core initiatives;   
2.	Creating regulations/directives as necessary to the mandate of the agency; 
3.	Recommending appropriate legislative, regulatory and other measures (cross-jurisdictionally as appropriate) based on the findings of research/study programs;
4.	Formulating and/or funding a research/study program or programs designed to determine the need for measures, the effectiveness of measures taken, and measures that are required to ensure positive progress on issues falling within the jurisdictional areas noted;
5.	Publishing or authorizing the publication of scientific and other information;
6.	Engaging in public education and outreach, and holding public consultations and workshops; and
7.	Establishing and maintaining working arrangements with social, public or private organizations for the purpose of furthering the objectives of the CWA.
It should be noted that the CWA is envisioned to function in a multi issue, cross-jurisdictional manner not unlike how FedDev coordinates the innovation, science and economic development portfolios within its more limited geographic pocket.
While the Great Lakes and Great Lakes communities and stakeholders have been struggling to cope with the dire and growing impacts of climate change, invasive species penetration, polluted beaches and recreational waters, increasing nutrient levels and harmful algal blooms and exposure to toxics for generations, solutions have been offered in a clumsy and ad hoc manner. This approach has stymied positive outcomes, delayed meaningful actions, and permitted infrastructure deficits to grow, new invasive species to become established, water quality to diminish, and a divided governance approach has diluted results in ways that threaten the long-term health and sustainability of the multi-billion dollar resource that is the Great Lakes. Equally short-sighted and damaging is the fact that, when 
governments adopt this fragmented and poorly coordinated approach, loss of asset and knowledge leveraging, spending inefficiencies, and ineffective policy 
implementation are the inevitable results. The creation of a coordinating body such as the CWA would help turn the tide in favour of the Great Lakes and Great Lakes communities and stakeholders within the 

One role that I see as potentially helpful is similar to the role the federal government played in re-opening the provinces and territories during the COVID-19 pandemic. The federal government worked with all the provinces and territories to identify and agree on the situations under which re-openings will happen, even if they do not occur everywhere at the same time.
One issue BC faces for water allocation is to more objectively, consistently, and without undue political pressure assess when and where to restrict or close access to water use. When to restrict or close a basin or aquifer to any further allocation is an uncertain (because of lack of information) and highly political undertaking. Usually when staff go to the Minister to close a basin, the situation is grave and the decision to proceed is met with extreme resistance because that decision affects local development. It is likely that other provinces and territories share similar experiences but to varying degrees.
Therefore, it would be great if a Federal Water Agency can get together with all provinces and territories to formulate objective indicators, scenarios, thresholds to support local regulators in doing the needed thing  restrict or close access in those watersheds or aquifers that warrant it and point to a nationally recognized but practical set of conditions that can be used locally. This would deflect political pressure and keep the discussion at least as much as possible on the rational (economic and land development considerations can be part of the considerations).
The Feds already do something like this called the Guidelines for Drinking Water Quality, which is very helpful. However, when and where to restrict or close off a basin is much more uncertain, way more political and emotional but regulators need the help!
Another way a Federal Water Agency can help is in watershed and aquifer planning, not just in large watersheds or multi-jurisdictional watersheds and aquifers but aquifers that are deemed a priority (stressed), so this initiative follows the one above. There will be many hard decisions to be made in stressed watersheds and politicians are usually afraid to make them because it will upset local FNs, businesses, farms, environmental advocates, etc. So a plan, agreed upon by the local community and FNs reflects the compromise that each party are willing to make for the overall good, will help local politicians make the tough decisions. 

The role that needs to be played by the Canada Water Agency in filling these gaps is the enforcement of laws that protect our water. Especially in rural communities, laws that protect our water are often broken and there is no enforcement of these rules. There are few consequences for those who break these rules, if they are even caught at all.

Developing standards and monitoring them then publishing the results

Supporting research and education on best practices for mitigating impacts of sewer and drainage systems on receiving water quality. Working with regulators to stay abreast of best practices and supporting innovation

A water agency must take agency with water - with an open heart, an open mind and an open will. It must acknowledge that water is life and without water there is no life. It must honour and respect the need to honour and protect the water spirits. It must go back to the original Teachings and listen to the wisdom of the water that speaks to us in the babble of creeks and rivers, in the rush of rapids over rough terrain, in the torrential downpours, in the voracious tsunamis, in the soft trickling, in the sparkling dewdrops...we must quiet our mind to listen to her speaking and learn that she is as alive as we are and through ceremony and respect she will show us how to live in harmony.
Providing the standards, tools to measure results against the standards, and publishing the results.
Establish legislation that mandates any water removed for industrial/commercial/municipal use be returned to the eco-system in the same condition.

Stop the selling of groundwater by provinces.
A Canada Water Agency would implement new protection laws and regulations for all municipal and industrial water usage. It would also be tasked with the collection and interpretation of freshwater resources and developing a water security plan for sustainable future needs.

The Agency should play a role in advancing and leading implementation of innovative Canadian technology in the water sector. This would advance Canadas position as a global leader in water. Consider leveraging Sustainable Development Technology Canada (SDTC) and other water agencies and associations across Canada at the Federal level to further advance water tech development and usage, both nationally and internationally.
Canadian leadership is vital to advance the water reuse framework and supporting a circular economy, which support the value of water in all forms. The Agency can drive acceptance of alternative sources of water, matching water quality with its end use on a national scale. This leadership would help to unlock innovation across the country, helping municipalities and utilities to explore cost effective and sustainable solutions using integrated water management or One Water approaches.

The Agency can promote and provide guidance on triple bottom line approaches to water management across the country. This would identify and provide a consistent and accepted financial, environmental and social cost analysis on impacts to freshwater in Canada, highlighting the importance of the sustainable use of our water resources now and in the future.
The Agency also has a role to play in providing guidance on data standards while playing an active role in connecting and sharing data across the country. If data collected by all groups (developers, municipalities, provinces) were to be provided in a useable and consistent (digital) format and collected and housed in a central data warehouse managed by  data experts, it could then be made available to the public and other interested groups. A successful example of this happening in Ontario is through the Oak Ridges Moraine Groundwater Program. If similar groups were assisted by the Agency, then they could expand their data housing program exponentially to cover Ontario and other provinces. Data collected by provinces, territories, Indigenous peoples and others must also be coordinated. The Canada Water Agency can combine data and predictions into a centralized hub. Over the long term, institutional and procedural integration can be embedded within a renewed Canada Water Act.
The Agency must also play a lead role in ensuring data is leveraged effectively to build accurate flood and drought forecasting and prediction models. These prediction models can be used to map or improve mapping of flood plains, help guide safe development and conservation in our communities and enable more effective emergency responses.
The Agency should fund a national drought monitoring program run locally by groups such as the Conservation Authorities.
The Agency should support green infrastructure to manage rainfall which would improve water quality and prevent flooding by investing in low impact development solutions. The Agency should also provide funding to municipalities to invest in new infrastructure and retrofit existing sites.
The Agency could also be an effective vehicle for better and consistent tracking of monitoring data, specifically related to emerging contaminants of concern in fresh water bodies. Municipalities often struggle to monitor emerging contaminants of concern but are compelled to investigate given the collective need to understand how these contaminants affect drinking water sources. More leadership is needed from the Agency to track and provide best available science to safeguard our drinking water sources

Water is a human right and as such, must be protected from privatization, pollution and bulk exports. It's time we had a comprehensive National Water Policy that will safeguard communities' water.

The oil and gas industry, fracking, pollution by industry, dying salmon stock, and the threat of pipeline rupture.

Many of our communities are built by waterways to allow access to freshwater in the past but as we see changes in our weather there needs to be planning from the federal level to properly manage flood risks and watersheds.

 We have seen significant resource developed in our area and only forestry is required to report on their impact to our watershed. We need a plan that manages all industry impacts in the watersheds  and also to aid in protecting communities or moving communities to higher ground and stabilize river beds to protect communities and wildlife.  Many of our rivers are major corridors for wildlife and need to have a much better balance between the economic development in the areas and protection of peoples properties and the forest and watersheds.

In no particular order, my concerns are:
Pollution of the available fresh water.
Destruction of wetlands that act as a filtration system and important habitat for so many species.
Overdevelopment, especially in places like the Gulf Islands, leading to overuse of the fresh water aquifer and subsequent leaching in of saltwater when freshwater levels fall too low.
Freshwater aquifers elsewhere being polluted and destroyed by such things as fracking activities.
Ocean and river pollution (Mining avtivities, Oil tankers and crude/bitumen, Waste- including plastics, etc).and attendant ecological cascades of effects on the sealife, tourism, fisheries, etc.
Selling our fresh water to other countries for bottled water, literally draining away Canada's lifeblood.

As with many issues related to the environment, low-income communities and communities of color will be disproportionately impacted by removing this safeguard. Repealing the Clean Water Rule could increase water contamination. Contaminated water can cause a variety of health problems, especially for children. We have seen this heartbreaking and wholly avoidable reality in Flint, MI. Additionally, small and rural communities who rely on private wells, or whose water systems lack the resources to deal with polluted sources, will be hit hard by this rollback.

Protect our drinking water and keep the Clean Water Rule in place!
I am absolutely opposed to the proposed repeal of the Clean Water Rule. Repealing this vital safeguard will put our health and communities throughout the nation at risk. I strongly urge you to reconsider your position and drop the repeal of the Clean Water Rule.

This repeal will put the drinking water of 117 million people at risk -- that's 1 in 3 of us! Too many communities throughout the nation already struggle with access to clean water. Removing this protection for the bodies of water that feed our drinking water, filter pollutants, and recharge groundwater would make things worse.

Repealing the Clean Water Rule could increase water contamination. Contaminated water can cause a variety of health problems, especially for children. We have seen this heartbreaking and wholly avoidable reality in Flint, MI. Additionally, small and rural communities who rely on private wells, or whose water systems lack the resources to deal with polluted sources, will be hit hard by this rollback.

Protect our drinking water and keep the Clean Water Rule in place!
Please stand up for clean water: Don't repeal the Clean Water Rule.
KEEP IT IN THE GROUND!!!!!!!! REJECT GREED!!!!!!!!!!! SAVE OUR WATER! AIR AND PUBLIC LANDS!!!!!!!!!!!! SAVE LOCAL ECONOMIES!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!

utting clean water protections puts people and parks at serious risk. Clean water is essential for my family's health, our environment and our economy. The proposal to repeal this important rule could lead to weaker protections for many water bodies in the country, including those that surround and flow through our parks.

From Acadia to Grand Canyon, and Everglades to Glacier, water is a defining part of our national park experiences. I want to continue to enjoy swimming, fishing, paddling and wildlife watching without fear of pollution.

Repealing this rule would not only set back protections for our waterways, including drinking water for communities, but also weaken our ability to hold polluters accountable. Please don't let this happen.

Thank you for considering my request to protect clean water by letting the 2015 Clean Water Rule stand.

I am absolutely opposed to the proposed repeal of the Clean Water Rule. Repealing this vital safeguard will put our health and communities throughout the nation at risk. I strongly urge you to reconsider your position and drop the repeal of the Clean Water Rule.
As with many issues related to the environment, low-income communities (like Flint, Mich. and communities of color will be disproportionately impacted by removing this safeguard. Repealing the Clean Water Rule could increase water contamination. Contaminated water can cause a variety of health problems, especially for children. We have seen this heartbreaking and wholly avoidable reality in Flint, MI (where President Trump campaigned on this issue).
Additionally, small and rural communities who rely on private wells, or whose water systems lack the resources to deal with polluted sources, will be hit hard by this rollback.

Protect our drinking water and keep the Clean Water Rule in place!

I am appalled that you would put the drinking water of over 100 MILLION Americans at risk so that your corporate political backers can pollute our waterways at will. I understand you call yourself a Christian - if that's true how can you commit and act that is EVIL?

I am absolutely opposed to the proposed repeal of the Clean Water Rule. Repealing this vital safeguard will put our health and communities throughout the nation at risk. I strongly urge you to reconsider your position and drop the repeal of the Clean Water Rule.

As with many issues related to the environment, low-income communities and communities of color will be disproportionately impacted by removing this safeguard. Repealing the Clean Water Rule could increase water contamination. Contaminated water can cause a variety of health problems, especially for children. We have seen this heartbreaking and wholly avoidable reality in Flint, MI. Additionally, small and rural communities who rely on private wells, or whose water systems lack the resources to deal with polluted sources, will be hit hard by this rollback.

Protect our drinking water and keep the Clean Water Rule in place!

Please stand up for clean water: Don't repeal the Clean Water Rule.

Gutting clean water protections puts people and parks at serious risk. Is there anything you wouldn't allow if it helps to make the wealthy richer? Clean water is essential for my family's health, our environment and our economy. The proposal to repeal this important rule could lead to weaker protections for many water bodies in the country, including those that surround and flow through our parks.

From Acadia to Grand Canyon, and Everglades to Glacier, water is a defining part of our national park experiences. I want to continue to enjoy swimming, fishing, paddling and wildlife watching without fear of pollution.

Repealing this rule would not only set back protections for our waterways, including drinking water for communities, but also weaken our ability to hold polluters accountable. Please don't let this happen.

Thank you for considering my request to protect clean water by letting the 2015 Clean Water Rule stand.


I am writing to urge you to uphold the 2015 Clean Water Rule defining Waters of the United States (WOTUS) that are subject to protection under the federal Clean Water Act.

The Clean Water Rule provides protections for 20 million acres of wetlands and more than half of the stream miles across the country. We rely on these small streams for drinking water and these wetlands to protect our communities from floods.
I ask that you strengthen, not weaken, the safeguards that protect our water.
Thank you for your consideration.

Please uphold the 2015 Clean Water Rule defining Waters of the United States (WOTUS) that are subject to protection under the federal Clean Water Act. Repealing this vital safeguard will put the health of communities throughout the nation at risk. In the long view, much more economic value is created by preserving and protecting our lands then by throwing our trash over the metaphoric fence.

I am concerned about our water and want to see the Federal government do more, not less to protect clean water. This repeal would eliminate protections for up to 60 percent of streams and wetlands nationwide and jeopardize the health of drinking water sources for more than 117 million Americans. The Clean Water Rule provides protections for 20 million acres of wetlands and more than half of the stream miles across the country. Clean water is essential to our health, vital to all communities, and necessary for a robust economy. We rely on these small streams for drinking water and these wetlands to protect our communities from floods. I oppose this repeal which will weaken commonsense safeguards that protect our water resources. We need to be responsible stewards for the sake of future generations.

The Clean Water Act has a very bold goal - to make all of our waters swimmable and fishable. Repealing the Clean Water Rule will make it much more difficult to achieve that goal. Please listen to the majority of Americans who expect EPA to protect clean water, not polluter profits. I ask that you strengthen, not weaken, safeguards that protect our water.

You can't be serious. Why does this make any sense to you? I am absolutely opposed to the proposed repeal of the Clean Water Rule. Repealing this vital safeguard will put our health and communities throughout the nation at risk. I strongly urge you to reconsider your position and drop the repeal of the Clean Water Rule. Protect our drinking water and keep the Clean Water Rule in place!

Gutting clean water protections puts people and parks at serious risk. Clean water is essential for my family's health, our environment and our economy. The proposal to repeal this important rule could lead to weaker protections for many water bodies in the country, including those that surround and flow through our parks.

From Acadia to Grand Canyon, and Everglades to Glacier, water is a defining part of our national park experiences. I want to continue to enjoy swimming, fishing, paddling and wildlife watching without fear of pollution. As a resident of Florida's Treasure Coast I know firsthand how necessary these protections are.

Repealing this rule would not only set back protections for our waterways, including drinking water for communities, but also weaken our ability to hold polluters accountable. Please don't let this happen.

Thank you for considering my request to protect clean water by letting the 2015 Clean Water Rule stand. Please join with Mr. Bian Mast and Mr. Bill Nelson in our efforts to protect our waters.
My comment as a citizen of the United States is one to uphold the highest
standard of pollution free waters in total. This goes right down to local
creeks and streams where children play whether we like it or not. Do not
change The Clean Water Act or weaken it in any way and specifically by
redefining what are considered waters that can be regulated. This world is a
sacred gift to humans and we are the stewards to keep our waters
pristine and available to drink and for safe recreational use. It is not just
the water involved here. Many ecosystems would be in peril if we go back
to the old rules. With increasing population and urban sprawl it is even
more important to plan for the future. We face increasing species extinction
every year. Every species has a purpose and they all rely on clean water
to live (including us). The world our Great-Grandkids have depends on us now.
William John B.S. Forest Management, MBA
We are the United States of America, not individual countries. It is important that issues like clean air and clean water are viewed from a national perspective at the very least and ultimately from a global perspective. To change laws now regarding clean water is a foolish undertaking in which we all lose in the long run. I'm opposed to changing any law that is working towards clean water for current and future generations.

As a lifelong trout fisherman and clean water advocate I am writing to oppose the new EPA proposal to rescind the 2015 Clean Water Rule and I support the 2015 Clean Water Rule because it protects the Nation's headwater streams and wetlands. As you know, just this summer Don Carter State Park, near my home in Gainesville, was closed due to water contamination flowing from livestock farms on the upper Chattahoochee River. All Lake Lanier users were affected by this fecal contamination of our water supply. This is simply not tolerable.

America's headwaters are the genesis of our country's iconic rivers. The 2015 Clean Water Rule was designed to ensure that our nation's small waters remain intact, and that the water flowing from them is fresh and clean. These waters are the spawning and rearing waters for trout, salmon and other wild and native fish that contribute greatly to the $50 billion recreational fishing industry in the United States. What's more, these streams send clean water downstream, where it is used to water our crops, cool our industrial generators and provide clean, fresh drinking water for our cities and towns.

Clean water should not be a political issue. Protecting our watersheds and ensuring that clean, fresh water is available for fish, farms and communities is not an option - it's a responsibility.

As an American who cares deeply about clean water, I am counting on the EPA protect our headwaters and our nation's clean water. Please stand with America's sportsmen and women to defend Clean Water Act protections, and therefore you should support, not rescind, the 2015 Clean Water Rule.

Too many communities throughout the nation already struggle with access to clean water. Do not repeal protection for the bodies of water that feed our drinking water, filter pollutants, and recharge groundwater.

As with many issues related to the environment, low-income communities and communities of color will be disproportionately impacted by removing this safeguard. Repeal of the Clean Water Rule could increase water contamination. Contaminated water can cause a variety of health problems, especially for children. We have seen this heartbreaking and wholly avoidable reality in Flint, MI. Additionally, small and rural communities who rely on private wells, or whose water systems lack the resources to deal with polluted sources, will be hit hard by this rollback.

Get your filthy hands and minds off of the US EPA's in place water protections!! You have more money and power than you need or deserve!! Who will vote for you which is from what I am seeing a nearly rhetorical question, but what isn't, you egregious bastards is who will cheer for you??? I will, if still here while I watch you devour one another because the painting of such is already cast in stone. Hand's off you jackals!!

I am writing to support the proposal to repeal the 2015 "Waters of the U.S." rule.
As a cattle producer, I strongly support this effort. Water is important to me and my family farming operation. I am glad that you recognize the flaws of the current WOTUS rule. It is overly broad and creates heavy burdens and costs, legal risk and tremendous uncertainty for farmers, ranchers and others, like me, who depend on the land. Under the 2015 rule, farmers, ranchers and other landowners across the country face new roadblocks to ordinary land-use activities.

I applaud EPA for taking this important first step toward developing a new definition of waters of the United States that will protect water quality while also promoting economic growth, minimizing regulatory uncertainty, and respecting the proper roles of Congress and the states under the Constitution.

The WOTUS rule has never been implemented because it was stayed by both a federal district court and a federal court of appeals due to its flaws and violations. Challengers raised numerous substantive and procedural defects in the rule, including that the rule exceeds EPA's statutory authority, imposes burdensome regulatory uncertainty, was finalized in violation of mandatory procedural requirements designed to ensure a well-informed result, and is otherwise unlawful. In all, the rule was challenged in multiple courts by all sides (31 states and 53 non-state parties, including environmental groups, state and local governments, farmers, landowners, developers, businesses, and recreation groups).

The EPA should move forward and ditch this rule once and for all, then go back to the drawing board and write a new rule that protects water quality without trampling the rights of landowners, businesses, and the states.

Clean water is about 1. human health, 2. health of the water' inhabitants, 3.less money spent on purifying water, (an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure,) 4. keeping the land adjacent to the water cleaner, 5. improved health of people who live near the water as a result of improved air quality, 6. less money spent on after the fact clean-up, 7. no toxic contamination of crops watered by polluted water.

As a child I suffered from eczema as a result of the strong chemicals that my home town had to use to clean the heavy metals and other toxic substances out of the river water that was the source of our drinking water. The only times I didn't have cracked and bleeding hands was when I was away from my hometown for a week or more. When the factories upstream in Kansas City started cleaning up their effluent, my condition ceased to exist.

it's our health. If you pollute our water you will have more people sick which will put a stain on the Health Care system. Don'tplay games with our health.

Stop putting business's profits before the health of the public.
Health care is already expense and will become even more expensive if you allow corporations to dump stuff into our waters
Once land and runoff is polluted, as in from the source area being polluted, all downstream areas inherit that pollution. It is therefore vital that areas that are connected to larger downstream water bodies and represent vast source areas, even though they may not be navigable or permanently wet, have full and equal protection as the navigable / fishable and swimable waters.

Once the pollution is in the source area it will be harder and more costly to manage in the downstream waters.

Do not weaken regulation, find a better way, prevention is truly better than cure.
It is immensely necessary for us to protect our water and environment. Nothing is worth the price of Americans losing our health or ecosystem. Please keep and enforce regulations that help us protect our resources. Thank you.

I am writing to oppose the new EPA proposal to rescind the 2015 Clean Water Rule and I support the 2015 Clean Water Rule because it protects the Nation's headwater streams and wetlands.

I love fishing in Virginia's rivers. I live in Reston Virginia, and I enjoy fishing on the Potomac, Shenandoah, James and Rapidan Rivers to name just a few. rivers. The 2015 Clean Water Rule was designed to ensure that our nation's small waters remain intact, and that the water flowing from them is fresh and clean, to the great benefit of the lovely rivers mentioned above. These waters are the spawning and rearing waters for trout, salmon and other wild and native fish that contribute greatly to the $50 billion recreational fishing industry in the United States, including the great outdoor economies that we enjoy here in Virginia. . What's more, these streams send clean water downstream, where it is used to water our crops, cool our industrial generators and provide clean, fresh drinking water for our cities and towns.

Clean water is not a political issue. Protecting our watersheds and ensuring that clean, fresh water is available for fish, farms and communities is not an option - it's a responsibility.

As a Virginian who cares deeply about clean water, I am counting on the EPA protect our headwaters and our nation's clean water. Please stand with America's sportsmen and women to defend Clean Water Act protections, and therefore you should support, not rescind, the 2015 Clean Water Rule.

WOTUS is a huge overeach of federal control and a serious breach of private property rights. Farmers are generally good stewards of their property. The attempt to take control of water on private property to the point of controlling a puddle causes serious problems and regulatory burden for the owner. Please void this rule.

We very strongly oppose the proposed repeal of the Clean Water Rule and ANY attempts to dismantle this rule through riders on legislation. The last thing we should do is weaken protections for clean water. Repealing this vital safeguard will put our health, economy, and communities in Maine at risk. This repeal will remove Clean Water Act protections for the streams that feed the drinking water sources for more than one in three Americans. It would endanger 20 million acres of wetlands that provide habitat for wildlife throughout the nation. 
It could allow the pollution and destruction of the water resources that small businesses like craft breweries and outdoor recreation companies in Maine rely on. Maine's economy receives $8.2 billion in spending on outdoor recreation annually, and much of that recreation depends on clean water. Repealing the Clean Water Rule is shortsighted and flies in the face of public opinion. More than 800,000 Americans supported the Clean Water Rule when it was proposed. It is grounded in science and the law. It is an essential tool to help us to get to goal of ensuring all of our waters are swimmable, fishable, and drinkable.Please stop the repeal process and the riders and let EPA do its job: protecting human health and the environment.
To Maine's Congressional delegation: We again very strongly urge you to oppose any riders on legislation that not only repeal the Clean Water Rule, but also block the public from commenting on this critical issue. Passage of such riders would set a dangerous precedent for rolling back many more of our environmental and public health protections without going through a science-based, public process. This is unacceptable, undemocratic, and violates our principles of a government of, by, and for the people. Thank you for considering my concerns. We look forward to hearing from you.

I oppose the proposed repeal of the Clean Water Rule and attempts to dismantle this rule through riders on legislation. Repealing this vital safeguard will put our health, economy, and communities in Maine at risk. Clean water is the backbone of healthy communities and essential for a strong economy. This repeal will:
1. remove Clean Water Act protections for the streams that feed the drinking water sources for more than one in three Americans
2. endanger 20 million acres of wetlands that provide habitat for wildlife throughout the nation and serve to protect many communities from flooding
3. allow the pollution and destruction of the water resources that small businesses like craft breweries and outdoor recreation companies in Maine rely on
4. risk harming the outdoor recreation that provides $8.2 billion to Maine's economy, and much of that recreation depends on clean water
In short, repealing the Clean Water Rule is shortsighted and illogical. It is an essential tool to help us to get to goal of ensuring all of our waters are drinkable, fishable and swimmable.

Please stop the repeal process and the riders and let EPA do its job: protecting human health and the environment.

To Maine's Congressional delegation: I urge you to oppose any riders on legislation that not only repeal the Clean Water Rule, but also block the public from commenting on this critical issue. Passage of such riders would set a dangerous precedent for rolling back many more of our environmental and public health protections without going through a science-based, public process. This is unacceptable, undemocratic, and violates our principles of a government of, by, and for the people.

Right now the extreme coast near Ocean gate, Portland, Maine needs to have botanists, ornithologists, zoologists, gelogists investigate proposed changes to zoning and building and changing the coast where barnicles are living, where seaweed is attached to the rock erosion barrier that is in very good condition. There are sea birds breeding along this section of Commercial Street. I saw a large bird perched on a wooden pole that was left over from a wooden dock. Tiny birds were also on top of a wide pole stuck in the water. They were probably fledglings from a nest that was on one of the wide poles. 
There are rock barnicles on the rocks that are the erosion barriers along the coast. There is seaweed growing bright green on the rocks of the erosion barrier. The bottom of the ocean is grey. It is possibly clay. The water is extremely clean. Portland has cod. Massachusetts is having a survey up the coast. They do not need to. They will only ruin the area and bring uneducated people to the area. This area is wilderness and needs to be preserved. It is not being commercially fished. Regular people could put a pole out there, if Portland allows it but no one was there when I was there Sunday at 5:00 A. M. There could be endangered species. Maine has laws about not touching sand. The ocean bottom is a silty,clay, sand. In the Federal government Wetland Protection Laws are governed by soil type and plant growth and animals. Please check this out. The City of Portland, Planning Board handles these things. There is no Conservation Commission. Immediate action is needed. Please make them file an Environmental Report. Please make them do it. Sincerely, Cheryl A. Joseph, Boston college, B.S. Biology, M.Ed. Curriculum and Instruction, Former High School Biology and Chemistry Teacher.I have read Massachusetts Wetland Protection Laws and Regulations.

DO YOUR JOBS and KEEP U.S. water CLEAN

The EPA rules regarding discharging pollutants into waterways are based on a substantial body of evidence showing that water quality and flow in tributaries and wetlands can affect the water found downstream. The basis for the rule was reviewed by the Science Advisory Board and subject to extensive analysis.

The economic analysis used to justify repealing the WOTUS rule has been criticized as being based on flawed data and not accurately reflecting the benefits of the rule. Was this sloppy work or was this a politically motivated move to make the costs of the rule exceed the benefits?

I oppose the proposal to amend the WOTUS rule. The current rule was science based. The proposed revision ignores the science and misstates the economic impacts.

You cant be this ignorant. Literally every living thing, including you and any unfortunate people who happen to be your family, needs clean water! Why? Who would even think this is a good idea to get rid of a Clean Water Act? This is not okay. If anything, we need more clean water to... you know... survive.

Clean water is a bi-partisan, intergenerational issue. Changes to the definition must be scientifically based and not from a legalistic definition (or partisan desire). For that reason I am opposed to this 30 day review of the regulation. The original 2015 rule had more than 400 meetings with stakeholders across the country. This request is for 30 days and its not open to scientific evidence. I suggest strongly that this change be more rigorously investigated by real scientists.

I've lived, worked, and played on the water my entire life and I know firsthand the critical role that clean water plays in the ecological, economic, cultural, and physical well being of my community. To threaten the health of our waterways is to threaten the health of our people, economies, and communities. I believe that the EPA should promote the health of our waterways, and the immense benefits that they provide by extension.

I do NOT support the recodification of pre-existing rules on the definition of the waters of the United States. It is imperative that we maintain as many water sanctuaries as we can to ensure the protection of the environment.
As one of your employers,I am writing to voice my opposition to the irresponsible elimination of clean water protections for any waterbody.
The Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) plan to review and revise its definition of "waters of the United States" (WOTUS) is an attempt to gut the Clean Water Act. It would allow industry to freely pollute water bodies, and lead to widespread degradation of waterways. That would create an ecocide. Nobody is immune not even you.

Clean water provides many benefits to communities, from safe, affordable drinking water, to recreation and jobs. Eliminating federal clean water protections endangers everyone. Without the Clean Water Act protections that have been in place for more than 40 years, states may allow powerful industry interests to pollute waterways, harming nearby and downstream communities.

Last but not least, human animals are inherently STUPID AND SUICIDAL and this across the board. Just remember you are on our payroll and that you and your families are not immune to water poison.

Please do not roll back the Clean Water Rule. This rule protects small streams that feed our drinking water sources. It enables wildlife to flourish in our wetlands across the nation. These are common-sense safeguards for our water. Clean water is important to all of the public. If you remove these protections the health of the public is endangered. We expect the EPA to protect the environment. You must not make it easier for industry to pollute our water. If this rule is reversed it will only benefit the oil industry and other big businesses. The function of the EPA is to protect the environment not to protect the profits of big business. Do not cancel the Clean Water rule.

America's headwaters are the genesis of our country's iconic rivers. The 2015 Clean Water Rule was designed to ensure that our nation's small waters remain intact, and that the water flowing from them is fresh and clean. These waters are the spawning and rearing waters for trout, salmon and other wild and native fish that contribute greatly to the $50 billion recreational fishing industry in the United States. What's more, these streams send clean water downstream, where it is used to water our crops, cool our industrial generators and provide clean, fresh drinking water for our cities and towns.

Clean water is not a political issue. Protecting our watersheds and ensuring that clean, fresh water is available for fish, farms and communities is not an option - it's a responsibility.

As an American who cares deeply about clean water, I am counting on the EPA protect our headwaters and our nation's clean water. Please stand with America's sportsmen and women to defend Clean Water Act protections, and therefore you should support, not rescind, the 2015 Clean Water Rule.
As an angler and hunter I'm well aware that doing away with this act is part of Sec'ty Pruitt's and President Trump's efforts to benefit corporate interests and not the interests of everyday people who recreate in the outdoors, drink clean water (we remember how Flint was and is affected by impure water) farm our lands and provide goods and services to millions of people. If we don't have clean water and air all of us are at risk.

I oppose going back to pre-2015 regulations. It is sneaking in a way to allow more pollution and manipulation of our small streams and wetlands.

I am writing, as a physician and public health advocate who lives along the banks of the Hudson River in Suffern, New York, to voice my opposition to the elimination of clean water protections for any waterbody. The Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) plan to review and revise its definition of "waters of the United States" (WOTUS) is an attempt to gut the Clean Water Act. It would allow industry to freely pollute water bodies, and lead to widespread degradation of waterways.
I am filing this petition because the availability of clean water provides many benefits to communities, from safe, affordable drinking water, to recreation and jobs. Eliminating federal clean water protections endangers everyone. Without the Clean Water Act protections that have been in place for more than 40 years, states may allow powerful industry interests to pollute waterways, harming nearby and downstream communities.
Limiting the scope of the federal Clean Water Act also ignores two simple facts: that waterways are connected and pollution moves downstream. If a company is allowed to pollute or destroy a river, lake, stream or wetland, the impacts will be felt downstream - endangering people, fisheries and drinking water. Similarly, just because a stream may flow only seasonally does not mean it does not play an important ecological function, and destroying or polluting it will have widespread impacts. Therefore, I am opposed to limiting the scope of the Clean Water Act to just "large bodies of water capable of serving as pathways for interstate commerce," and ask that you maintain Clean Water Act protections for historically protected waterways.
As a physician and public health advocate who lives along the banks of the Hudson River in Suffern, New York, I am very aware that people and communities across the country will suffer if the Clean Water Act is gutted by EPA. Meanwhile, the costs of industrial pollution will be forced upon people and communities that will have to deal with the impacts on their lives, health and livelihoods. Reducing clean water protections by redefining WOTUS will not create jobs - in fact, it will imperil jobs that rely on safe, clean water.
Because EPA's goal should be to provide the maximum clean water protections to all communities. I oppose any attempt to rewrite the WOTUS definition to reduce jurisdiction of the federal Clean Water Act from historic levels. I urge you to consider these concerns as you proceed.
PLEASE do not NOT redefine what constitutes water. This ruling will devastate wet lands. As we all know after Hurricane Katrina, wetlands are essential to protect against flooding. Further, overturning the Clean Water Rule will threaten the drinking water of up to a third of all US residents. Please do your job and protect people over profits.

First of all, it should be unlawful for any person or company to pollute water anywhere. Not polluting water should be the norm not haggling over how much pollution is okay or which waterways and water bodies it is okay to pollute.

The revised definition of the Waters of the United States approved in 2015 is a necessary refinement to protect water throughout watersheds from mountain streams to wetlands at the coasts. It's all connected.

I strongly oppose rescinding any part or section of the Clean Water Rule. In a time of water disruption and mass privatization of our waters, we should be working to strengthen the Clean Water Rule. I hereby encourage the EPA to classify more waters for protection under this rule. It is time for the EPA to do it's job and to do it properly. Work to protect the environment, not sell it to the highest bidder.
Healthy watersheds are in the public interest and should be a top priority for any responsible administration. Pollution in our waterways, no matter how small, affects far more than landowners and stakeholders upstream. We have spent too many years with too few regulations protecting one of our most precious resources, not too many.

Rolling back protections for OUR waterways is a step backwards. Keep our waters clean

I am a life long fly fisher and love the outdoors. Keeping our water clean and free of industrial and agricultural pollution is critical for the well-being of our fisheries and all that is downstream. History has shown that individual interests can override the greater good when individuals are allowed to damage the land and water for their personal economic benefit with little concern for long-term impact. It is all of our responsibility to make sure that our waters are protected for the future generations.

As an resident of Iowa that also farms, I believe in the efforts by Administrator Pruitt to rescind this misguided rule. The 2015 rule defining "waters of the United States" (WOTUS)-marketed by EPA as the "clean water rule"-had more to do with land than water. It was a land-grab that created confusion and uncertainty for farmers, ranchers, and others who depend on their ability to work the land. It has imposed giant regulatory hurdles and costs. This rule goes way further that just streams, rivers, wetlands and other things we usually think of as wet areas, and really covers areas that look more like land than water. We are already open to federal jurisdiction. As you know that it means the federal government can regulate things like ditches, waterways and puddles, and even areas where puddles once existed. That is not what Congress intended when they wrote the Clean Water Act. Please ditch this tedious rule.

I am a Grinnell Iowa farmer and I strongly support the efforts by Administrator Pruitt to rescind this misguided rule. The 2015 rule defining "waters of the United States" (WOTUS)-marketed by EPA as the "clean water rule"-had more to do with land and politics than water. It was a misguided land and control grab that created confusion and uncertainty for farmers, ranchers, and others who depend on their ability to work the land. It imposed enormous regulatory hurdles and costs. This rule goes way beyond streams, rivers, wetlands and other things we usually think of as wet areas, and really covers areas that look more like land than water. An entire state like Iowa is open to federal jurisdiction. As farmers we value our land and strive to preserve it. If an entire state like Iowa is open to federal jurisdiction. It means the federal government can regulate things like ditches, waterways and puddles, and even areas where puddles once existed. That is not what Congress intended when they wrote the Clean Water Act. I am counting on you to follow through with ditching this onerous rule.

It is refreshing to see that steps are being taken to ditch the rule once and for all. I support the action of Mr. Pruitt is taking. Withdrawal of this rule will not harm anything as it has never been implemented. Let's abandon this damaging rule and bring everyone together and craft a responsible rule void of all the illegal burdensome regulations included in this rule. Agriculture, and therefore everyone cannot afford this rule, ditch it for good.

WOTUS is a disaster for small and medium size business. Why does the govermentan to have control of everyhig. What about te property rights of the person who worked hard and bought the land.

The most recent regulation defining "waters of the United States" (or "WOTUS") was issued by EPA and the Army Corps of Engineers in 2015, and has been referred to the "Clean Water Rule." That rule subjected to regulation many land features (such as ditches, ponds and swales) that had not previously been regulated, by defining those features in the rule as "waters." U. S. Steel own and operate facilities located on or near those features. The expanded definition of WOTUS that is included in the Clean Water Rule could result in stringent restrictions on discharges to those features, which could affect our ability to use those features for water management purposes, and could affect our ability to properly maintain those features. The Supplemental Notice that the Agencies have recently issued provides support for repealing the Clean Water Rule and reinstating the definition of WOTUS that existed previously. U. S. Steel therefore has a direct interest in the Supplemental Notice. 

A Great Lake and our other waters will not be great if the tributaries in its watershed are not protected from pollution. This is yet another roll back. Just Say No to the GOP (Greed Over People) for reducing protections for small streams and wetlands that are damaged by Agri-biz, construction and other human activity. Water ( and pollution in it) does NOT stay put! It will find it's way to Your drinking water supply eventually.

The GOP and their corporate masters have been chipping away at the protections of the CWA for years. We must take a stand for the sake of humans to follow us- We are only 'borrowing' these resources from future generations. Water Is Life.

Water is "life"; your life, my life, and every human on this planet. Weakening any safety measures for clean water, regardless of its source, is the most important safety regulation we have AND IT MUST BE HELD TO THE HIGHEST STANDARD, not subject to politics.

We do not need rivers of fire. We need clean rivers of usable water.

I oppose changing these rules. Strong federal positions on topics like clean water are what prevent issues like overwhelming pollution that harms the health of our citizens and the strength of our agriculture. Changing these rules would have a significant negative environmental and public health impact. This is another case in which I want our nation to be united in doing the right thing for our health and for preserving the land around us.

Please continue taking action against WOTUS. This rule is highly flawed and totally overreaches the government's authority to regulate our nations water sheds. Please stand against a rule that would affect 97% of Iowa's water. This regulation would greatly alter all agriculture and municipal operations. Let's get some logic that will protect the rights of landowners and not hinder agriculture.

Please restrict the navigable waters of the United States to those that allow for intrastate commerce. Any expansion of that definition hurts the country.

This rule needs to be eliminated. It is a huge power grab to regulate ponds & streams on individually owned land. Huge power over reach by the EPA

Repealing Obama era clean water acts would be a step backward from progress in environmental stability and equal rights to clean water. This is in no way superfluous legislation, ensuring that all Americans have access to clean water in their homes and public spaces. Businesses have stated that having the clean water acts in place does not hinder their production, nor raise their long term costs, and aren't opposed to following the guidelines put in place. I urge you to continue to protect the clean water for all Americans and leave the existing legislation in place.

I unequivocally oppose the proposal to recode and redefine American waters. The Clean Water Act should be kept in place to protect the drinking water of millions of Americans. Clean drinking water is critical to the health of our citizens, our economy, and our national security.

I am writing today to express my opposition to the proposed action to repeal the 2015 Clean Water Rule. I am concerned that repealing this rule will put our nation's headwaters at greater risk and increase uncertainty for the health of our nation's rivers and all water bodies downstream.

As a recreational user of our nation's waterways I have personally witnessed the recovery that has occurred on our nation's waterways since the Clean Water Act was enacted in 1972.

Repealing the Clean Water Rule of 2015 will compromise our ability to protect and improve the health of our nation's rivers.

I strongly disagree with the proposal to reinstate the regulations that existed before the 2015 Clean Water Rule. Doing so will only increase uncertainty and continuity in implementing the Clean Water Act, running counter to the goals of the rulemaking. Likewise, pursuing a future rulemaking to conduct a substantive re-evaluation of the definition of "Waters of the United States" does the same.

Keep our mountain streams clean and free of toxins. Keep the original clean water regulations

As a natural-born US citizen, I oppose any changes to definitions of "Waters of the United States". Leave it alone, please. Thank you.

Clean water is a basic need & healthy water bodies lead to it.
The Clean water Act & Rulings are critical to maintaining healthy rivers & lakes.
Stop your attack on regulations that have made the US great already, a country with a great environment.
No need too "make it great again" by making its people sick!
We don't want to go back the "good old days" when everything was fine as long as you didn't drink the water or breathed the air.
Don't take us there!!

I am writing today to express my opposition to the proposed action to repeal the 2015 Clean Water Rule. I am concerned that repealing this rule will put our nation's headwaters at greater risk and increase uncertainty for the health of our nation's rivers and all water bodies downstream.

I strongly disagree with the proposal to reinstate the regulations that existed before the 2015 Clean Water Rule. Doing so will only increase uncertainty and continuity in implementing the Clean Water Act, running counter to the goals of the rulemaking. Likewise, pursuing a future rulemaking to conduct a substantive re-evaluation of the definition of "Waters of the United States" does the same.

For the health of our nation's rivers, I ask that you defend the rule the 2015 Clean Water Rule in court and cease efforts to repeal the rule.

Do not repeal a law that was made to protect our waters and ecosystems. Do not endanger the drinking water of 117 million Americans. I don't want that beautiful state's or any other sates' water to be polluted. I don't want habitats to be destroyed and people to go without clean water. No one wants this. Don't let the Trump administration and allied Repubs bully this through. DO NOT LET IT HAPPEN. Protect our water.

By returning the regulation of the state level, water quality WILL be put at risk of corporate greed.

The health of the nation's waterways cannot be held hostage by in-fighting between government agencies as to who can define what a waterway is! Punting the problem back to the state-level to remove it from the EPA's jurisdiction is ignoring the problem and hoping it will go away.

The regulation should be clear, ethical and simple. 'No business should be able to use any water course as a disposal method for any chemical'.

The definition of a water course should be extremely easy. 'Any body of water that is connected, or is possible to be connected, to the water table.'

Corporations and businesses have an unfair funding advantage over special interest groups when lobbying at the state and county level, and will push for exceptions that will negatively affect the water quality for hundreds of miles downstream in order to increase their profits.

Please stop this massive government overreach .

I believe that clean water in this country is essential to the health of it's inhabitants and the many lakes, streams, rivers and oceans that water flows through and into. I also believe the federal government exercised profound overreach by declaring all waters to their origin and agricultural point of origin runoff under the jurisdiction of the EPA. I consider it just one more example of the Obama administration attempting to control every facet of the American people. I believe this decree should be repealed.

By preventing pollution from spreading to protected sources by way of small or temporary bodies of water, the Clean Water Rule would protect the drinking water of countless communities in the U.S. The Rule should be preserved and implemented as intended, and the EPA should lead the way in defending it.

I fully support the Consortium of Aquatic Science Societies (CASS) opposition to the Trump Administration's ongoing efforts to repeal and replace the 2015 Clean Water Rule (Waters of the United States Rule or WOTUS). CASS urges the EPA and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to consider the far-reaching implications to aquatic resources from repealing the rule and calls for a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to engage in the repeal and replacement of WOTUS to ensure the best available science is considered.

EPA and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers adopted WOTUS to clarify longstanding confusion over which water bodies were protected under the Clean Water Act. The rule was developed using the best available science and with robust engagement of stakeholders. More than 1,000 peer-reviewed, published, scientific studies support the rule.[i]

CASS is particularly concerned with the removal of the long-recognized value of ecosystem services provided by wetlands from the Administration's cost-benefit analysis that is used to justify the repeal of the rule. While methods to quantify the value of wetlands may have changed, there is significant research that conclusively demonstrates that society values the benefits of wetlands even more than in the past.

Freshwater and marine wetlands provide many services that promote human well-being and are critically important to aquatic resources and the health of our nation's waters. Wetlands keep our streams, lakes, and groundwater cleaner by treating urban and agricultural runoff through natural processes. They also provide water during times of drought, and absorb runoff and floodwaters, which reduce disaster recovery costs. Wetlands sustain essential habitat for commercially and recreationally valuable wildlife, fish, and waterfowl to feed, nest, breed, spawn, and rear their young. Our nation's wetlands cover a small proportion of our landscapes (<6% of the lower 48 states), yet they contribute many times their proportional share in services to human well-being.

Dr. Colden Baxter, President of the Society for Freshwater Science stated, "More than a century of scientific research has unequivocally demonstrated that the physical, chemical, and biological integrity of entire river networks depend on ephemeral, intermittent, and perennial headwater streams, as well as the myriad associated lakes, wetlands, and off-channel habitats."

This overwhelming scientific evidence formed the basis for WOTUS, yet the proposed repeal ignores carefully collected data and heavily scrutinized studies. WOTUS is a scientifically defensible regulation that defines the scope of Clean Water Act jurisdiction in a way that bolsters its effectiveness in maintaining and restoring our nation's waters and, in doing so, protects the public interest in flood control, water quality, and fisheries and associated biological resources."

Dr. Douglas Austen, Executive Director of the American Fisheries Society (AFS), stated that "the 2015 Clean Water Rule provided a scientifically sound definition of 'Waters of the U.S.' The move to roll back the rule puts America's headwater streams and wetlands at greater risk of being destroyed or polluted and imperils vital habitat for fish and aquatic resources."

Dr. Robert Twilley, President of the Coastal and Estuarine Research Federation (CERF) and a professor at Louisiana State University, said: "Estuaries and coastal waters rely on clean water from upland watersheds to support productive commercially and recreationally valuable fisheries of the United States. The definition of 'Waters of the United States' was a joint effort of industry, private landowners, and government that recognized the importance of headland and other wetlands in providing the water quality that supports downstream economies."

Dr. Arnold van der Valk, President, Society of Wetland Scientists (SWS) and a professor at Iowa State University, decried the decision to repeal and replace the current WOTUS rule and noted, "It will result in the loss of many of the nation's wetlands. This decision is short-sighted and counterproductive. It will significantly reduce the multitude of ecosystem services that these wetlands currently provide us at no cost. As a result, the tax payers will have to pay to build elaborate and expensive infrastructure to replace these free ecosystem services, such as flood reduction and cleaning up polluted water."

Dr. Linda Duguay, President of the Association for the Sciences of Limnology and Oceanography (ASLO) stated, "As aquatic scientists, we know how tricky it can be to define where a waterbody begins and ends. WOTUS was crafted with input from a diverse range of stakeholders and with reference to a host of peer-reviewed studies regarding the connectivity of aquatic systems. Repealing the rule at this juncture would undo years of open and deliberate rulemaking, unnecessarily placing the nation's aquatic resources at risk."

I am a farmer and I am really concerned about water quality and how it is going to be addressed in the near future! I am excited to see that action is being taken to "Ditch the Rule" for good! By ditching the rule, water quality will not be harmed as the activists are claiming! We need to start again from scratch and create a better definition that will protect the rights of landowners and will not hinder Agriculture! I fully support the actions being taken by Administrator Pruitt and his team. Water quality is very important to us farmers and the people in our communities! Please take action and support

As a supporter of agriculture, I strongly support this effort and am glad that you recognize the flaws of the current WOTUS rule. I am dealing with State laws that define the water in my private ditch as public waters. I don't need more government rules that are not approved by the Congress. Water is important to me and my family. The rule is overly broad and creates heavy burdens and costs, roadblocks to ordinary land-use activities, legal risk and tremendous uncertainty for farmers, ranchers, landowners and others, like me, who depend on the land.

I applaud EPA for taking this important first step toward developing a new definition of waters of the United States that will protect water quality while also promoting economic growth, minimizing regulatory uncertainty, and respecting the proper roles of Congress and the states under the Constitution.

The WOTUS rule has never been implemented because it was stayed by both a federal district court and a federal court of appeals due to its flaws and violations. Challengers raised numerous substantive and procedural defects in the rule, including that the rule exceeds EPA's statutory authority, imposes burdensome regulatory uncertainty, was finalized in violation of mandatory procedural requirements designed to ensure a well-informed result, and is otherwise unlawful. In all, the rule was challenged in multiple courts by all sides (31 states and 53 non-state parties, including environmental groups, state and local governments, farmers, landowners, developers, businesses, and recreation groups).

The EPA should move forward and ditch this rule once and for all, then go back to the drawing board and write a new rule that protects water quality without trampling the rights of landowners, businesses and the states.

As a former EPA enforcement attorney who has represented numerous stakeholders relating to CWA jurisdiction during my 30 years as an environmental attorney and environmental law instructor, I am submitting the following comments on the proposed rule defining the term "waters of United States." As a threshold matter, the proposed rule conflates the significance of Justice Scalia's misguided plurality opinion, which is not the law of the land and is inconsistent with the letter and spirit of the Clean Water Act as reflected by the legislative history. See Discussion at http://staging.saveepaalums.info/the-clean-water-rule-why-navigability-matters/ (which is incorporated in total to these comments by reference).

Narrowing the scope of the federal jurisdiction over our Nation's waters will compromise water quality and complicate the protection of the Nation's waters. I wholly endorse and support the comments developed by SAVE EPA including the following observations and concerns:

- Clean water is essential to our public health as well as to our economy (cite local examples, i.e. tourism, agriculture, brewing industry, etc.).
- Nearly 45 years after the passage of the Clean Water Act, we have made tremendous progress, but many of our rivers, lakes, and bays are still not safe for swimming or fishing. Rolling back the Clean Water Rule will set that progress back.
- The Trump Administration's proposed changes to the Clean Water Rule, coupled with the dramatic cuts to EPA budget, represent and all-out assault on public health and our environment.
- The proposed rescinding of the 2015 Clean Water Rule would severely limit what waters are protected under the Clean Water Rule. It would put drinking water supplies for millions of Americans at risk.
- Low income communities and communities of color are already disproportionately impacted by contaminated water. Contaminated water can cause a variety of health problems, especially for children. Repealing the Clean Water Rule could put many of these communities at further risk.
- Small and rural communities, who rely on private wells or whose water systems lack the resources to deal with polluted sources, may be hit the hardest by the roll back.
- We can't support and grow small businesses by putting the natural water infrastructure they rely on at risk of destruction. - We won't protect public health by ignoring the science that water quality throughout a watershed depends on what happens to upstream waterways.
- In the semi-arid West, most of our waterways are not "navigable" year around but rather flow seasonally or intermittently, and any pollution from these waterways will ultimately flow downhill into "navigable waters."
- Sportsmen, conservationists, and recreationalists know the critical importance of clean water and it's essential role in maintaining fish and wildlife populations.
- Rescinding the 2015 Clean Water Rule will result in regulatory confusion and uncertainty for the regulated community. The "repeal and replace" process for the Clean Water Rule is similar to the on-going process for health care and will result in similar confusion.
- Rolling back the rule will result in the same regulatory confusion that resulted in broad-based calls for clarity about which "waters" the Clean Water Act protects. Rolling back the rule is bad governance, bad for businesses who rely on regulatory certainty, and bad for our communities that deserve clean water.
- Rescinding the 2015 Clean Water Rule will also place additional burdens on EPA and the Army Corps of Engineers at a time when these agencies are already under difficult staffing and budgetary constraints.
- The 30-day comment period for the proposed changes is totally inadequate for such a critical and complex issue and represents a blatant attempt to minimize public input. The comment period should be extended to at least 120 days.
- Any revision of the 2015 Clean Water Rule should be based on sound science and public input. Unfortunately, the proposed process allows for neither.

The proposed WOTUS rule is a disservice to the United States citizens, does not reflect the goals or proper scope of the Clean Water Act and should be rejected. Thank you for consideration of my comments.

I just want to say, Go Scott Pruitt, Go President Trump! Ditch this crazy rule that is nothing but governmental over-reach and land grabbing. We don't need the EPA's bureaucracy and power to get any larger. We farmers know how to take care of our land.

It is a grave mistake to revoke parts of the Clean Water Act and regulations protecting waters of the United States. The short sighted thinking of this is unbelievable. The EPA under Scott Pruit has become a disaster. All Americans must resist his irresponsibility.

This issue should have been put to rest a long time ago. The EPA is continually overstepping their authority and it is good to see an administrator who will finally recognize that fact. I urge the EPA to continue its efforts and to move forward on ditching the WOTUS rule.

I am old enough to remember the sad condition of the Hudson River watershed (where I grew up) and the Assabet River watershed (where I now live). I have been greatly encouraged by the improvement in water quality in both areas as awareness and protection increased. Sadly, it would be very easy for these and many other areas to slip back to their previous state, or even worse, if not protected. That would be a tragedy and a grave injustice to the American people.

As someone who lives and works very near to three rivers and one of the largest sources of fresh water on the entire planet, I believe that the last thing we should do is weaken protections for clean water. I oppose the proposed repeal of the Clean Water Rule.

As a beef producer in NE Texas, an economic source of clean water is very important to me. The ground water in our area is unusable so surface water sources are our only option. Clean surface water starts with watershed run off. Private landowners are the majority as stewards of this and want to do what is right for their land. Education and assistance with proper management techniques is very important as we continue to put more pressure on our agricultural resources. Economics is the biggest driver for most in farming and ranching. The stewards of these lands will not make proper stewardship decisions if the economic / financial situation makes it too difficult for the to stay in business and provide for their families.

Keep the regulations to a minimum, but continue with the guidance and assistance in proper resource management. Be ever mindful of agricultural trade. The famers and ranchers work extremely hard and often struggle to stay in business. The very low percentage of agricultural producers, those under 30 years of age, says it all. It says, there's too much hard work, too much risk and not enough reward. We need their energy and innovative minds to keep agriculture and proper stewardship alive.
Economics, much the driver for stewardship of land and water.
Much of our future for agriculture lies in export trade.
Please don't forget about us when you sort out international trade agreements.

As landowners, farm operators and residents of our area, we have a far better grasp of the needs and possibilities where water use and protection is concerned.


As a human being who must drink water to survive, I urge you not to loosen the regulations within the Clean Water Act.
You have a responsibility to the people of the United States of American to insure that everyone, including future generations, can rely upon safe and clean water. It is your responsibility to insure that all bodies of water, rivers, streams, lakes, oceans and aquifers are clean and safe. Do not take us back to the days when the Potomac River was so polluted that the water was unsafe to touch or when areas of the Great Lakes were so polluted, they caught fire.
This is a Christian and moral responsibility.

I am writing to strongly urge you, for the benefit of all, to uphold the 2015 Clean Water Act defining Waters of the United States (WOTUS) that are subject to protection under the federal Clean Water Act. The repeal of this safeguard will put the health and safety of communities throughout the nation at risk. The federal government must do more, not less, to ensure we have clean and sufficient water. Water runs downhill. We must protect the small streams in order that they will deliver clean, uncontaminated water to the larger streams below. The wetlands protect us from flooding, contribute to drinking water supply, prevent pollution, add to groundwater supply, prevent storm damage, protect fisheries and shellfish and protect wildlife habitat. Clean water is essential to our health and to our economy. I urge you to strengthen safeguards that protect out water.

I am writing to strongly oppose the repeal of the 2015 Clean Water Rule. The waters protected by the rule are essential to the life and landscape of people and wildlife in Florida and the entire United States. Having clean water is essential to all Americans and we are particularly cognizant of this in the State of Florida.


The Clean Water Rule recognized the important role wetlands, rivers, lakes, and streams play in protecting the water we use to drink, work, and play. Using science, the law, and the public's support as its guide, the Clean Water Rule clarified the Clean Water Act's jurisdiction and created brighter lines for which waters are covered by the act and which waters are not. This was not a simple process. Developing the rule took years and hundreds of public meetings and thousands of comments with and from farmers, conservationists, affected industries, and many others. However, the end result means greater protections for the economy and environment in the Great Lakes region.

Repealing the Clean Water Rule and replacing it with a new rule based on a weaker standard could put this success at risk. Alarmingly, the new rulemaking being contemplated could mean the loss of Clean Water Act protections for nearly 60 percent of streams everywhere except Hawai'i and Alaska that do not flow year round. It also threatens protections for most of the 110 million acres of wetlands in the continental United States.

Instead of threatening the chemical, physical, and biological integrity of the nation's waters, we ask instead that the EPA and Army Corps recognize that water is interconnected and support the Clean Water Rule's implementation. Upstream waters have a strong influence on the quality of water downstream. Pollution in a tributary is carried into bigger and bigger waterways before emptying into one of our country's saltwater or freshwater seas. Our region knows this first hand. The 2014 'do not drink' order in Toledo, Ohio, dramatically underscores this reality.

The Great Lakes and their tributaries are integral to the lives of people in Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin. They provide a place to work and to play. Perhaps more importantly, they give us water to drink. They must be protected.

Progress toward uniform and consistent Canadian water quality standards (regulations, not guidelines).  Water quality standards and guidelines are remarkably variable around the world causing confusion and the opportunity for a water user to select the standard that best meets his project.  For example, the standard for dissolved chlorine in seawater is different for the tropical Caribbean than for Canada.  And, of course, enforcement.

Canada lacks a national water law and rigorous, enforceable water quality standards and regulations. There's an uneven patchwork of provincial water policies to protect drinking water. This means that our drinking water is not equally protected across the country.  While many big Canadian cities have relatively sophisticated water treatment facilities, many rural, low-income, or First Nations communities lack such infrastructure and rely on untreated or minimally-treated water.  There are  major lead issues across the country too: https://www.cbsnews.com/news/lead-canada-drinking-water-worse-than-flint-crisis-investigation-2019-11-04/

Even the United States has the Environmental Protection Agency that gives mandatory consideration to environmental justice in their evaluation of projects and regulation development, Canada has no laws that address the concept of environmental justice  the fair distribution of environmental benefits and burdens, without discrimination on the basis of socio-economic status, race, ethnic origin, or residence on an Aboriginal reserve. This is one reason why, from Shoal Lake 40 to Grassy Narrows to lead in pipes in Montreal, we are confronted with example after example of environmental

Canada lacks a national water law and rigorous, enforceable water quality standards and regulations. There's an uneven patchwork of provincial water policies to protect drinking water. This means that our drinking water is not equally protected across the country.  While many big Canadian cities have relatively sophisticated water treatment facilities, many rural, low-income, or First Nations communities lack such infrastructure and rely on untreated or minimally-treated water.  There are  major lead issues across the country too.

Even the United States has the Environmental Protection Agency that gives mandatory consideration to environmental justice in their evaluation of projects and regulation development, Canada has no laws that address the concept of environmental justice  the fair distribution of environmental benefits and burdens, without discrimination on the basis of socio-economic status, race, ethnic origin, or residence on an Aboriginal reserve. This is one reason why, from Shoal Lake 40 to Grassy Narrows to lead in pipes in Montreal, we are confronted with example after example of environmental injustice within our own borders injustice within our own borders

Water ownership and regulation is either unclear or uniform across provinces and territories. The cost for water usage differs by region because the regulators seek to make profit. Water, like air, is essential to life and access to it should be a universal right. Regulators should exist to ensure quality control, distribution, and improvement but they should be the purview and beneficiary of the federal government, not by the public. Only by being under a centralized body of governance can we ensure that water will not be used to profit or deprive certain demographics from having access. Taxation and proper explanation what is the objective may lead to citizens willing to pay more towards GST in return for affordable and equitable access to water across the country.
For my area in Northern Alberta there has been significant studies and data available. The issue is balancing the environmental, community and industry demands on these areas. We cannot continue to think that industry can continue to develop at an exponential rate. There is only so much forest and area to develop. We need to know when we need to stop the continued push forward and commit to a sustainable economy not one in continued growth.  

We also need to get industry out of doing the work of environmental studies. They have a significant vested interest in resource development and as such shop for the needed research firms that provide the required information to support their development not ones that raise concerns. We have seen it time and again when they get research they dont like the hire a new firm and magically the concerns have been mitigated by the new study. 

My community raised concern about mining and development in our watershed and had a study done 25 years ago that predicted significant floods in our communities and industry hired a number of other firms to counter our studies. They ended up being approved to develop an area that was deemed a sensitive watershed and surprise surprise our communities has had increasing floods as predicted by our studies with increased intensity each year and 1/3 of our residents have not been able to return or rebuild their homes.  Due to our concerns and the recent floods Industry has recently hired new consultants to confirm their work was not the cause. 

Get industry out of doing their own studies they are absolutely conflicted and driven by greed and proffers. Environmental studies need to be independent of the resource industrys wishing to develope the resources. We cannot be so dam naive to think differently.

Product regulation: 
It's too difficult for most consumers, even the ones who care, to make fully informed product use choices to reduce their impact on water systems. If we know objectively that the majority of our waste treatment systems can't properly eliminate a certain chemical before returning the water to our rivers, then we should regulate to reduce that chemical's prevalence in the products available for purchase in our country. In addition, clear and scientifically validated information about more harmful chemicals should be provided on products, beyond typically labeled "eco-friendly" products that are sometimes misleading. Accurate "End-of-Life Education" should be more prevalent in all of our consumer products.

Recognition: of water as a basic human right. 
Provision: of safe clean drinking water to ALL Canadians and communities
Restriction: of the sale of water to (and by) corporations for profit.
Public control: of civic water and sanitation services (publicly controlled) to ensure better accountability to the people, rather than a focus on profits. 
Regulation: to ensure safe and sustainable use of water resources, now and in the future. 
Oversight and enforcement: of regulations to prevent pollution, redirection, and misuse of water and minimize the effects of climate change
People resources (scientists and properly trained professionals): to oversee and enforce regulations

As requested during the National Water Policy Panel webinar from May 13, I wish to provide my feedback with some comments. 
Both the water security booklet and the water agency white paper provided in advance are very attractive; the list of water issues and descriptions very well done and carefully thought. However, there is a big gap and an important miss in the analyses: groundwater. 
If the reader makes a word search in the white paper he/she wont find the word groundwater, not once!  The booklet incudes the word groundwater once, like in passing.

How can that be?

Yesterday during the videoconference, groundwater and/or aquifers were mentioned just once, as a word in passing, once during the 90 minutes discussion!

How can that be?

Any freshwater action, or initiative, that does not include groundwater would be incomplete; the claim of becoming (world) freshwater leaders, not including groundwater, is worthless. How can Canada be leader in freshwater security when groundwater is not included? 
The documents mention planning and managing freshwater with an integrated approach at the river basin... without integrating the existing aquifers. Given the climatic, geomorphologic and geological characteristics of Canada, most of the surface waters in the rivers are dynamically linked to groundwater in shallow aquifers. In fact, the base flow of most rivers in Canada is actually fed by groundwater from the aquifers underneath! They are coupled.
Groundwater is extremely important for Canada; it crosses most Canadian jurisdictions and several transboundary aquifers are shared with our neighbour to the south. Groundwater is resilient and a very strategic freshwater resource against climate change. Actually, there is more groundwater stored in the aquifers of Canada than all the surface water captured in reservoirs and stored in natural lakes, combined.

Groundwater is an issue of national security.

Canada is already a recognized world leader in groundwater research; many important aquifers (though not all) and their groundwater dynamics, have been studied by the federal government and provincial agencies for years.
A complete and intelligent Federal Water Agency should fully and implicitly include groundwater in its mandate. This must be recognized and clearly written in updated versions of the above-cited documents.

There's a huge pool of data from the hard sciences -- all valuable.  Time now to include more from historians, psychologists, anthropologists, educators, theologists, and recreationists.  Let's get beyond the notion that water is for extraction, exploitation and consumption ONLY.  Let's hear from the soft sciences!
Too many authorities on water use and regulation that wont budge. Too many politicians who wont challenge agriculture, mining, oil and gas, and traditional landscaping ideals.
Science is essential but is only as good as empirical measurements, the world view of the day, and the hypotheses it hopes to prove.

Indeed there is a gap, and it gapes, between science and spirit. And between government and the people.

Water is our life-blood. Bodies of water are 'beings' in themselves. Water is not just meant to be taken like a crop is planted and harvested. Water is not renewable; there is a finite amount in earth's ecosystem. To remove, manipulate, or change water is a permanent wound to that being. 

Water provides benefits to all of us that just cannot be measured, nor do we have the words to describe those immeasurable benefits. Science spawns data, policy and programs. But that is not enough. That's why reliance on industry self-regulation is flawed.

It's time to rethink how we make our decisions in water management. We must protect our watershed from manipulation and pollution. Let's take our cues from our First People's tradition, and the respect their tradition gives water, as a beings

We know too little about groundwater, the savings account for water.  We need much stronger and more comprehensive policy and regulations to protect water from the many threats that exist.  These are meaningless without oversight and enforcement.  Aggregate companies, fracking operations, pipeline spills, mining companies all seem to get a free pass on destroying ecosystems including water.  Water is required by every form of life and must be protected at all costs.
The most important information we need now is an understanding of the value in economic and ecological terms of the water where ever we have it in Canada.   We have a really bad history of undervaluing the resources, and that leads too often to abuse and scarcity.   This should be an ongoing analysis over the next hundred years after a set of preliminary data is put together.


just like the global warming issue when we the consumer's fail to look harshly at our own personal demands/expectations are we not just pointing fingers at others as the problem rather than confronting our own selfish use of it. While 200000 + Canadian's live w/o reliable energy supply we demand more & more. Although we d
demonstrate that we are green environmentalists attempting to disrupt others lives in their misuse of energy, water, etc we fail to look while in fact we need to look in our own backyard. We are encourage with every retail a advertisement we see to continue in our consumer lifestyle because "We deserve it"! Not true my friends, there is not a government policy yet made or ever will be made that will fix the problem no matter how smart the scientist until we learn to current the other to consume into an urge to conserve the resources the Good Lord has given us to manage, conserve and care for. As history has recorded Pride, Gluttony, Greed, Selfishness has led to the destruction of many once strong nations. Do we have the appetite to curb our self deserving urges. History has recorded it as goes the leadership, so goes the ship. Do we really want a leader who will show us by example how to curb our selfish urges to conserve the collective wealth of this nations great resources? Policy and law change little while exemplary leadership can show us the way

The biggest program gaps we have in the present system is not making the water users return their waste water in the same or better condition than when they took it in.

We require clear regulations that will take precedence over any other Act. 
Our Water should never come secondary to ANY Act. It is necessary for all life.

I agree with previous comments about the need for harmonized water standards and regulations.

I would add that a water agency could play a key role in helping municipalities and rural communities formulate flooding and drought preparedness plans.  Disaster risk management is a huge task that not all jurisdictions have the resources to accomplish, but preparedness plans are often >75% boilerplate; that is, local plans could be produced by building on a Canadian model plan.  This would save those agencies a lot of work and promote the formulation of preparedness plans, which in turn could save lots of headache and $$$.  Disasters always come as a surprise, so it is crucial to be proactive.

Professional reliance is inadequate.  Companies and industry are permitted by the government to hire their own 'researchers' to do environmental studies.  
Laws, standards and basic guidelines are woefully inadequate, monitoring and enforcement is inadequate and fines and consequences are negligible.  Again it seems industry writes its own rules and governments sign off.   A homeowner can be fined for watering the veggie garden on the wrong day but a multibillion dollar industry can dump contaminants and toxins into rivers and lakes almost at will.

We currently do not know how much water is used for various purposes in major watersheds in Canada.  Water is used for municipal, industrial and agricultural purposes.  But how much is used on a daily or weekly basis?  How much is in reservoir storage?  How much is used in the summer versus the winter?  How much is left for in-stream flows?  What are the technologies and policies available to reduce those water uses and what are the net effects on the water quanitites and quality flowing through our rivers, available in lakes, or remaining in groundwater?  Governments track water licenses, but licensed amounts do not equal actual withdrawals.  Return flows are often untracked.

Water integrity in First Nations communities is a tragedy and should be the first priority of the government.
A comprehensive strategy for groundwater has to be instated. Groundwater management and governance needs support. 
Additionally, while moving into the 21st century, water security, quality, quantity and justice need to me considered as matters of natural security.

Groundwater mapping is severely lacking in most of Canada. Many areas of the United States have this information, which allows them to make have more fact-based decision-making regarding the use and overall management of groundwater resources. Much of rural Canada depends on groundwater for many purposes.

Data gaps - everything. but fundamentally, lack of interoperability between datasets; lack of comprehensive national (or even watershed-based) data sets; 
Science gaps - social science gaps re: behaviour modification are very important - as governments do not access many of the possible means at their disposal to modify behaviour; major gaps in water treatment technologies to treat / eliminate "emergent" pollutants (pharmaceuticals, endocrine disruptors); lack of science understanding of Canada's aquifers and groundwater flow ; lack of understanding of role of wetlands (esp. prairie "potholes") in water cycle and flood / drought prevention; -- there are lots of gaps
Policy and program - the usual - funding cuts to environmental programs in general, lack of culture of conservation-building / water awareness amongst Canadians; 
the biggest block to functioning water policy and programming in Canada is, as in all things environment, the Canadian Constitution - those who dream of some sort of National anything don't appreciate the complexity of fed-prov-terr relations .. so hold out little hope for that solution .. 
Another major policy gap -- the pollution prevention provisions of the Fisheries Act .. a total prohibition on pollution that no-one follows, with three sets of functioning regulations .. vastly under-utilized policy / legal tool - so under developed that it is a pretty ineffective pollution prevention tool

Inadequate data collection, updating & accuracy of water consumption.
Lack of enforcement of water statutes especially drainage legislation.
Lack of resource support for Watershed Associations.

Groundwater is an issue of national security.  I would add that groundwater is Canada's most precious resource.

The Groundwater Industry remains mostly forgotten by many academics but can be the source of volumes of information.

Almost 9 million Canadians depend on groundwater, at least 30% of the population, the groundwater industry must be doing something right.  Although most provinces have long had groundwater associations I am encouraged by the recent incorporation of the Canadian National Ground Water Association.  Within this association is an ability to bring the knowledge of all of these practitioners together.   

Help with sharing science, data and in the creation of policy and programs by the men and women who work with this resource daily from coast to coast to coast, can only make us wiser.

A Federal Water Agency will benefit from this knowledge base on the groundwater responsible for our fresh water.  

When the well is dry, we know the worth of water.  Benjamin Franklin 1746

Less an issue of isolated gaps amongst these areas, and more an issue of bureacuratic silos handling each. IE one agency sets policy, another agency collects data, and another agency makes management decisions. If each agency are only concerned with making themselves look good, the potential for feedback and improvement from shared learnings is limited.

We need to be better at multi-disciplinarity. For instance, we need to be better at integrating across different ecosystem types (terrestrial, aquatic, agrosystem). We have enough data and the litterature is quite clear on the fact that we can't ignore what's going on in other surrounding ecosystems if we want to understand issues of water biodiversity and quality. Agricultural runoffs are just the simplest examples, but connectivity between different ecosystem types are complex and can take different forms. We need a better understanding of those dynamics and how they play out at larger spatial scales to eventually influence water quality at the watershed level. We are already many researchers getting together to address those issues at the moment, but at the government level, gate keeping across the different agencies is still the rule. In that sens I echo here what others have said, but the last thing we need is just another new agency. We either need a truly multi-disciplinary agency or at least that existing agencies are better at talking to each other (this can happens via cross-agency committees etc..). Of course, like any government structure, for it to be really useful, it needs to embrace a more open structure when it comes to sharing data and collaborating with the academic sector.

Road salt. Current voluntary guidelines do not require users of road salt to report their use.  This should be mandatory along with r=training on minimizing road salt use.

Fit-for-purpose standards for water will allow for more creativity and adaptability in our changing climate. Why are we watering lawns, flushing toilets, and washing sidewalks with potable water? Current infrastructure is a part of the answer, yet there is no indication that new developments will embrace different, more effective infrastructure. Policy should enforce higher standards in new developments and fit-for-purpose treatment and use whenever possible.

Essential science: 
impacts of climate change on existing and emerging water quality issues, cyanobacteria dominance in mesotrophic and oligotrophic lakes, education and science communication
 Data:
utilizing high-frequency lake buoy data, more long term monitoring that is tailored to the type of lake or river that is being monitored, data is missing in our smaller and mid-sized lakes, so much funding and research is focused on the Laurentian Great Lakes (which are important!) but data is needed on the impacts and "base-lines" lines on our smaller lakes.
Policy: focused on required regulation, better flow within the different levels of government, one area or department  citizens and researchers can go to  and be connected with all things water

program gaps:
Who is making sure regulations and rules are being followed? With water being managed by all levels of government to some extent the program will need to be able to bring together all water scientist, policy, managers, and citizens together.  

Finally, a gap I see being in Central Ontario is that so much of the resources go towards larger cities which do not have the same number of lakes to monitor and manage. It would be nice to see a program that helps bring educated researchers/professional to areas that do have a lot of water bodies

We need more community-based data collection. Community-based water monitoring systems need to be given more funds and resources in order to collect on-the-ground authentic data.

the science has been done repeatedly, the data exists, the policies have been visited and revisited and still there are huge gaps when politicians are allowed to bestow or remove protections or to grant corporations the use of the commons, in this case the water.  It's a cop out to keep doing studies and spending money amending policies unless there are some teeth to them.  Get on with it.

In relation to governance, a national water assessment and strategy would be a good first step.  An assessment of how the Canada Water Agency could harness and coordinate and facilitate interdisciplinary and multi-agency teams to identify and address the potential threats would be helpful.

When it comes to managing fresh water and water resources, an understanding of the system as a whole, its overall form, function, physiochemical pathways is essential to create the context for determining how best to manage the resource both for the natural system and for people.  We currently still tend to manage fresh water on political boundaries rather that natural boundaries such as watershed units of various size and this limits our ability to understand cause:effect relationships of various uses and perturbations on the system and to enable policies that best fit for a particular watershed, its characteristics and uses.  In many situations, various policies may be in conflict with each other, given the specific characteristics of a watershed.  In this situation, an understanding of a particular watershed would help to determine which policies should take priority over others given the nature of the watershed and the uses and goals of the Provincial and Federal governments.
At the very least, we should be developing water budgets for all of our watersheds, especially those in southern Canada where much of the use, development and pressure resides in order to know how they manage water over the course of the year and where we as people may affect this budget and also affect the quality of water draining over and through the watershed.  Water budgets are only as good as the long-term and continuous gauging of our watersheds since gauging data provides a way to verify water budget analysis (over and above providing an understanding on the way the watershed responds to various occurrences and events).
In addition to the collection of data, development and use of the various science disciplines around water, we also need policy and programs that ensure that local communities are involved in the development and understanding of their fresh water and water resources.  This approach, whether policy or program, engages communities and helps them become better stewards of their water and water resources.
Other programs that have been started but never fully implemented are watershed management plans and studies that are then linked into the public planning processes at the Federal, Provincial and Municipal levels.  These types of plans, if developed properly provide the critical input to landuse planning, agricultural planning, resource extraction planning and public water management and planning as well as management of all other resources touched by water.
In addition to core programs such as watershed-based studies and plans should be programs designed to increase the resiliency of watersheds to better manage fresh water and related resources given higher climate variability.  Without restoring lost resiliency, we get locked into protecting the rapidly deteriorating landscape rather than rebuilding it for ensuring fresh water quantity and quality

On an annual basis, the funding allocated to fresh water science and monitoring in Manitoba seems to become less and less. We need to employ more on-the-ground teams to collect basic water quality data throughout the province, on a scale that actually allows us to understand what the real problems are and where they are originating from.  For example, it is largely through efforts of non-profits like the Lake Winnipeg Foundation that we have any idea where major sources of nutrient pollution are occurring in this province. This should be something that the government of Manitoba funds, and should extend to more than nutrients- forestry, mining, and oil and gas are all present in the Lake Winnipeg watershed, and yet we have very little grasp on the true impacts of fresh water.  These are somewhat easy problems to fix, compared to something like aquatic invasive species (which is another issue facing this watershed).

Science and data (and program) - we need far more environmental technicians and biologists across the province, so we can collect more data on each of the water quality issues facing the region. It is only by having enough data that we will be able to understand the magnitude of the challenges we face.

Policy- There needs to be robust policy across Canada to protect our fresh water. Too often are waterways polluted or destroyed for the sake of industry, and often to the cost of taxpayer dollars when sites are abandoned or businesses go bankrupt.  BEFORE approval and construction begin, any new project should have funds built in to mitigate pollution during project operation, and to restore sites once a project has gone to completion.  We all rely on fresh drinking water that won't poison us our the land we use to grow food- it's fairly obvious we need strong policy if we intend to stick around in the long run, as a species

Water is a very transitory commodity. It must be considered within its own unique watershed and rainfall. The program must think and develop parameters that respect the natural watershed boundaries and not be captured  by surveyed boundaries. This need may never be met so the whole exercise will fail on that single critical parameter.

The very transitory nature of fresh water means that it must be continually monitored and tested. The technology to do this exists but there is no indication that the will to do so on a continuous basis does not.  

The mismatch between electoral and watershed boundaries must be addressed and resolved before any meaningful work can be done on preserving our fresh water resources.

Impacts of forestry in our watersheds need to be better understood, connections between groundwater and surface water need to be better documented and understood. BC needs more resources to devote to monitoring and enforcement of water licences related to agriculture operations. Inherent Indigenous jurisdiction must also be explicitly integrated into water management regimes.

Senior Government (Federal and Provincial) need to step up to the plate and start enforcing the regulations that already exist, and/or empower local agencies to take on the responsibilities of protecting freshwater resources.
Logging practices and other destructive human activities need to to be focused on long term improvement of ecosystems rather  than the current model of constant progressive degradation.
Stop cutting old growth and change logging and industrial practices NOW to make sure the trajectory is for progressive improved health of freshwater resources looking 50 to 100 years into the future.  Current trajectory is for catastrophic failure and collapse.

From my own personal experiences/interests in BC:
-hydrometric data for small streams, especially in lower reaches of systems as that is where coho, chum and chinook spawn. BC has a fed-prov hydrometric network and agreement but that only covers major streams and rivers. Development occurs more often near smaller streams and sufficiently long-term data are missing there.

-groundwater observation well network. BC struggles with maintaining a network of ~180 wells. Support from the feds to increase the network and help maintain it would be helpful. Warning: monitoring is a long-term commitment.

-While the Geological Survey of Canada has an excellent history of geological mapping at the land surface, perhaps it's time to get together with provincial and local governments to look at 3-D mapping of the subsurface?

-with respect to gaps in industry, it would be beneficial to look at the various types of drilling and work with the newly formed Canadian National Groundwater Association to: 1) explore making well drilling, environmental drilling, geoexchange drilling, and well pump installation into red-seal or national trades, and 2) support the CNGWA to develop affordable, continuous local training for these contractors to improve their water-related skills.

-BC has also tried to develop activities (e.g., groundwater protection workshops) directed at local citizens, FN and non-FN water providers to improve skill and understanding/appreciation of the groundwater resources. Explore the feasibility of significantly expanding these activities. We need to put in decades of work to change practices and values.

-Groundwater quality data. In BC, water quality data from non-FN water supply systems (permitted under the Drinking Water Protection Act), and FN water supply systems are sampled on a regular basis, including at the source. This data is valuable but are stored in various databases - Hedgehog, Healthspace, WaterTrax, Excel, non of which is publicly available. Much convincing needs to happen to bring all these jurisdictions together to commit to one common database and made accessible to those who want to analyze regional water quality patterns and trends

We need to protect freshwater biodiversity. Reevaluate all dams in Canada and determine their necessity or if the enegery created from the dam can be easily created through another renewable power source. Dams drastically change the water ecosystem and radically affect salmon runs and other fish. DO NOT USE HATCHERIES. Allowing non wild fish into the wild severly compromises the real eild fish population. Hatched fish are not real fish. If we remove dams and allow the fish to return naturally, they will prosper. 
Work with Trout Unlimited Canada to repair and modify culverts that disconnect our waterways. 
Ban fishing for a couple seasons and allow the fish population to recouperate. 
Mandate water conservation - every new toilet must be low flush, every shower head must be water efficient. 
Force industry to clean up waterways as these are the big contributors to  water polllution.

Housing devlopments and deforestation critically impacts out ability to store water in thr ground. Understand the relationship between greenlife and water conservation and we will respect forests and grasslands. They are more valuable than a distribution centre or a new housing development. Do not allow construction compagines to remove topsoil from thr location and resell it. Its theft.

(1) Research into environmental fate and toxicity of chemicals entering waterbodies by air, overland flow or wastewater streams. (2) Long-term monitoring of waterbodies to determine natural variability and climate change effects. (3) surface water monitoring to determine nutrient loading and phosphorous hotspots.

The principle data gap is the absence of a long-term monitoring program for surface waters.  It happens in dribs and drabs in universities and some agencies, but has no structure and, generally, weak data availability.  While sporadic surveys will help establish a snapshot of current conditions, quantification of change, particularly slow biogeochemical change, is impossible without dedicated monitoring programs.  This probably requires a hierarchy of approaches (and funding) to facilitate citizen data collection, provincial programs, university- and governmental research, and federal monitoring.

Living Lakes Canada is doing some excellent work at standardizing the collection, analysis and roll up of water systems/watersheds in Canada, particularly in the Columbia Basin of British Columbia.

I would also like to see better harmonization between federal departments - with the proposition of Universal PharmaCare for all, has anyone looked at the risks posed to water based on the potential increase in pharmaceuticals? This is an real issue that I don't hear being addressed at all... how to construct Waste Water Treatment tech to eliminate pharmaceuticals and personal care products from the receiving aquatic environment.

Almost twenty (20) per cent of the worlds surface fresh water is found in the Great Lakes. The system is invaluable as the source of drinking water for more than fifty-one (51) million people in the United States and Canada. The Great Lakes directly generate more than 1.5 million jobs and sixty (60) billion dollars in wages annually. The Great Lakes provide the backbone for a six (6) trillion-dollar regional economy that would be one of the largest in the world if it stood alone as a country. Recreation on and around the Great Lakes  including world-renowned boating, hunting, and fishing opportunities  generate more than fifty-two (52) billion dollars annually for the region. The area is also home for over 3,500 plant and animal species, some of which are found nowhere else on Earth. 

These facts mean issues such as the impact of invasive species on the functionality of the Great Lakes, toxics and other harmful pollutants, nutrient levels, beaches and bacteriological contamination, and climate change as it relates to water and shoreline infrastructure, have economic, social and environmental significance to the Great Lakes Region in particular, but also to Canada and North America broadly. Accordingly, and presumably in an attempt to enhance federal coordination and policy making on this subject, the Prime Minister has directed his ministers to, create a new Canada Water Agency to work together with the provinces, territories, Indigenous communities, local authorities, scientists and others to find the best ways to keep our water safe, clean and well-managed. The Prime Minister provided details on his plans for the CWA in: 

Minister Wilkinsons 2019 Mandate Letter which read,  work together with the provinces, territories, Indigenous communities, local authorities, scientists and others to find the best ways to keep our water safe, clean and well-managed Develop further protections and take active steps to clean up the Great Lakes, Lake Winnipeg, Lake Simcoe and other large lakes. and

Minister Jordans 2019 Mandate Letter which read create good middle class jobs and opportunity for coastal communities while advancing our conservation objectives Make new investments in marine science and fighting invasive species Use good scientific evidence and traditional Indigenous knowledge when making decisions affecting fish stocks and ecosystem management. 

In this context, gaps have already been identified. Now is not a time to debate the problems. Now is the time to find solutions to the challenges we face and to move ahead with those solutions

The essential science, data, policy and program gaps that need to be filled in relation to these freshwater challenges are: more water data collection (especially in rural communities), more community involvement and citizen education for freshwater issues, stricter rules and more education for farmers and those working in the agricultural industry to reduce agricultural runoff, and stricter enforcement of water protection policies.

It is time to acknowledge our governance systems are broken and we need a new way of understanding our world. It is time to empower Indigenous Grandmothers to lead and show us how to honour and respect water - be it the freshwater of lakes and rivers, the salt waters of the oceans, the fresh rainwater, or our birth waters. All is connected. It is time to listen and learn from the Indigenous Grandmothers and women who are responsible for the water, who have been walking for the water and caring for the water since time immemorial.  It is time to employ two-eyed seeing methods that bridge the old and the new, Indigenous traditional knowledge, the wisdom of Grandmother Moon who controls the waters of the earth and western scientific knowledge. It is time to acknowledge we don't know what we don't know and with open hearts, open minds and open will step into a new paradigm and way of doing things

Science - surface water quality standards applicable to all Canadians.
Data - information on aquifers is insufficient, needs to be monitored with respect to quantity and quality 
Policy - water assets should be managed on a watershed/eco-system basis
Program Gaps - baseline funding for watershed associations such as exists in Quebec is required nation wide

We dont currently have a proactive system with regards to flood mitigation and management and only react after these majorevents have occured. There is also limited data regarding human impacts on effects on glaciers and headwaters. It would be very interesting to see data regarding microplastic pollution in glacial ice as well as study microplastic extent in groundwater. 

We need solid policies regarding our water quality and security federally as well as provincially and municipally. Strong policies to protect our water and environment from abuse and misuse from a variety of industries. We need to ensure we have safe and clean drinking water for all Canadians and that involves significant testing and remediation of contaminated areas.

Recognizing the benefit of a One Water or integrated water management approach to using our water at local and national levels is key to sustainable management of freshwater resources. Drinking water, wastewater, stormwater and natural water systems need to be considered as one system, not individual systems. This integrated approach can unlock compatible sources of water for intended uses. This approach will undoubtedly be more sustainable than the current approach where highly treated drinking water is used for various purposes like landscape irrigation, agriculture, firefighting, and industry. In many of these cases other water sources may be compatible with the intended end uses. This gap in provincial and national water regulations and frameworks should be closed to allow a national integrated water management approach for water reuse, or treated wastewater effluent, as a resource with value.

Inconsistent data quality and data collection across provinces and federally represent a program gap that needs to be filled. There are large gaps in both water quality and quantity data analysis across Canada. Although a large volume of data is being collected in some provinces, it is not all being put into a common operating data warehouse that would make it available to groups that wish to use that data. For example, a large volume of water data (ex. hydrogeological and Environmental Site Assessment reports) are collected and submitted to the Province and municipalities in support of development applications. However, that data is mostly inaccessible on an aggregated basis.

Silo-ing of phosphorus and nutrient reduction programs in different sectors may be leaving cost effective solutions like water quality trading or nutrient credit trading off the table for municipalities. More national leadership is required to advance these types of innovative and cost-effective programs potentially offering incentives to help municipalities and other sectors explore scalable solutions with a high return on investment.
Forecasting stream flow, soil moisture and drought can help manage water use in a time of climate change and extreme weather. The Province of Ontario had a low water response program that was efficiently run by the Conservation Authorities. Unfortunately, funding for this program was discontinued by the Province. As a result, there are gaps in drought monitoring and response across Ontario, leaving ecosystems and water users vulnerable

Clearer standards for stormwater discharge into waterbodies need to be supported by science.  We need to understand the thresholds for a multitude of substances and develop methods to remove or treat them prior to releasing them into our watersheds.

Understanding groundwater systems, preventing contamination and finding ways to manage them effectively.

In my opinion it is the role of the federal government to develop the framework that provinces and territories need to live up to. 

It should provide that high level oversight that can balance the concern of communities, industry, economy and the needs of the environment. 

There are very few alternatives when concerns are raised outside of courts to ensure we are balancing the needs of this generation with the needs of our children and grandchildren. There needs to be a better balance with the economy, Ive seen time and time again where industry has been able to develope resources in ways that allow them to maximize their profits and leave the cleanup on the taxpayer. There are billions of dollars that are falling on the shoulders of tax payers as we make a hand full of people who are not even residing in our country excessively wealthy yet hurling years of decades debt at our kids

The proposals put forward in the white paper talk a lot about cooperation. However it has been federal governments of liberal and conservative governments who systematically withdrew from cooperation by withdrawing money and programs. Tom Axworthys description of Canada Water Policy was notable in that it did not even recognize the transfer of federal powers to the Prairie Governments under the Natural resource Transfer Agreements with Alberta, Saskatchewan and Manitoba. The theme of all the presentations today looked like an attempt to roll back the clock to a simpler world so Ottawa will once again have full control and was diametrically opposite to the cooperative aspirations suggested. Providing First Nation veto interest into federal decisions will do nothing to resolve the fundamental water issues that exist in all regions of Canada. To make a Canada Water Agency work in the evolving public environment the review would do well to look at how PFRA successfully fought and won against the 1930s droughts in the Prairies. It worked with provinces, First Nations, farmers and Municipalities and used the latest science and technology to solve the problems.  Todays presentations seemed a long way away from the reality that is required  Now and in the future. Study and consultation alone wont solve the problems. Action and money on the ground will.  To be successful much wider visions of Canadas water future are required well beyond the narrow focus of the current draft white paper

Firm science based convictions that are enforced fairly everywhere and not politically. Well spoken policies that do not yield. An iron fist in kid gloves? Also, do not allow larger countries (US and China) to bully us. Collaboration but not capitulation.

Maybe some degree of public engagement in advertising the endeavour. This would involve real people in locations where the water situation is compromised, diminishing or precious. Clean up activities with all levels of leadership showing up and taking part. In order to get buy in it has to mean something and feel real.

If a rule is developed it should not require 3rd party verification. Implementation of our nations Clean Air and Clean Water acts via the Title V and NPDES permitting programs have been successful without the additional costs of 3rd party verifications. 	
	
For years transportation programs have converted from gas/diesel engines to cleaner burning natural gas, but now those entities private and public will be punished for doing the right thing with higher natural gas costs.	
	
With the implementation of Boiler MACT regulations there is an incentive to shutdown old biomass boilers and switch to cleaner natural gas boilers	 however, this rule will increase natural gas costs and limit natural gas use.
	
The Clean Air Rule"" is a poor title for a rule that is limited to GHGs.  This is a GHG limit rule and should be titled accordingly.	
	
The last two summers our state air quality has been rated as unhealthy,  very unhealthy and even dangerous as a result of major forest fires, not because of GHGs. The clean air priority of state leaders (Governor, DNR and Ecology management included) should be focused on the biggest air quality problem we have (wild fires) and not GHG's. ",	
Eric Steffensen,ericsteffensen@bc.com,"There are options for folks to support low carbon power alternatives like Avista's Community Solar program. I'm a participant and fully support this type of program. It gives people the opportunity to walk their talk	 however, mandating carbon limits on industry and natural gas suppliers without the vote of the legislature or people is wrong. 
	
If a rule is developed it should not require 3rd party verification. Implementation of our nations Clean Air and Clean Water acts via the Title V and NPDES permitting programs have been successful without the additional costs of 3rd party verifications. 	
	
For years transportation programs have converted from gas/diesel engines to cleaner burning natural gas, but now those entities private and public will be punished for doing the right thing with higher natural gas costs.	
	
With the implementation of Boiler MACT regulations there is an incentive to shutdown old biomass boilers and switch to cleaner natural gas boilers	 however, this rule will increase natural gas costs and limit natural gas use.
	
The Clean Air Rule"" is a poor title for a rule that is limited to GHGs.  This is a GHG limit rule and should be titled accordingly.	
	
The last two summers our state air quality has been rated as unhealthy,  very unhealthy and even dangerous as a result of major forest fires, not because of GHGs. The clean air priority of state leaders (Governor, DNR and Ecology management included) should be focused on the biggest air quality problem we have (wild fires) and not GHG's. ",	

What is the state itself doing to keep cars off of the road?  Even state agencies are doing very little when it comes to proven opportunities for employees to work from a home office or a state office closer to where they live.  This in itself is putting thousands of cars on the road every day that do not necessarily need to be there.  How much additional carbon are these cars adding to the problem?  The state and the governor need to make it mandatory that each agency does everything it can to reduce commuting and be a good example to businesses.  The state should then offer businesses within the state incentives (tax breaks maybe?) to do the same.  Imagine the reduction from such a simple policy.  And happier workers as well.  ",	
I'd like a better understanding. CA accepts ODS, and forestry.  You specifically say no forestry - but with the destruction of WA forests last summer by fire - how can you not include these.

Also - the supply of CA allowed LFG and Livestock projects is tight, and leaves out many great CAR projects that haven't been 2ndly verified by a CA certified VB - in addition to an ANSI certified VB.  

I also have a question about early action - knowing that this is coming in 2017, how about some credit for mitigation during 2016?

Finally, I'm concerned about the EFSEC IQO list - no companies are from WA - the list hasn't been updated since 2009, and my company which is based in Seattle can provide the compliant offsets from CAR, ACR or other GHG registries. I'm contacting EFSEC about this - but please it shouldn't matter where a company gets the offsets, as long as they are registered with an acceptable program, such as CAR - and the retired serial numbers of each offset can be tracked. What is Black and Veatch doing on this list?  Why subject buyers to such a limited list such that 3degrees and Climate Trust.  My company, Evergreen Carbon can provide a wider choice and better pricing then either!

Now that the Paris conference has adopted a 1.5C goal, it is incumbent on Ecology to adjust the rulemaking process targets to be at least consistent with the goal.   The 2008 SB6001 goals are a floor, not a ceiling.  ",	

The last two summers our state air quality has been rated as unhealthy,  very unhealthy and even dangerous as a result of major forest fires, not because of GHGs. The clean air priority of state leaders (Governor, DNR and Ecology management included) should be focused on the biggest air quality problem we have (wild fires) and not GHG's. ",

Investing more moneyonresearch and development to make energy more affordable - and less on operations andtop level salaries. If we can put men and women on the moon, this should bea piece of cake!
ralph Klein was a bell end for selling off transalta
Put enough efforts, resources and commitment into seriously climate change and it will pay off. This might be hard for politicians to act short and long-term at the same time. But it does need to be done.
There are so many good ideas about clean and renewable energy, but we cannot forget about the many communities across Canada dependent on traditional energy, economically and socially. A transition away from fossil fuels in Canada needs to happen, but it cannot be overnight. I would be interested to hear ideas for transitioning local labour markets in a sustainable way so that working families can continue to support themselves in this transition.
I agree. I live in a small town about 70km outside of Ottawa and have limited options for energy use. Currently on electricity only, which costs almost as much as my mortgage. It's crazy! I would also be interested in hearing ideas about how I can help transition my family tomore efficient and sustainable (and affordable!)energy usage.
Agreed as well! While I live in Ottawa now, I grew up in a smaller community, and can empathize that not everyone desires living in a large city. The current structure of electricity delivery charges penalizes those who live in smaller, rural communities. It'd be great to see some reform on this! The idea of microgrids has been floated around a lot recently, but there's a need to analyze all thediverse data out there, and make a solid business case for these systems and how they may work in specific small communities in Canada (while looking at enviro, economic and social factors).
Energy transition "can't not happen overnight": is does sound like an excuse for not really acting to address climate change. Show the Canadian leadership and act now!
Local energy sources like biomass (firewood, wood pellets, wood chips etc.) will support the local economy by creating jobs and reduce our reliance on sources outside our respective Provinces. 
Anyone living in rural Canada should be researching geothermal applications. There is a higher capital cost (20-30k) but the operating costs are dramatically lower than electric baseboard or fossil fuels. Plus, geothermal systems provide air conditioning - year round climate control. The government has talked about bringing back the geothermal grant and if they do, I hope it gets a lot of publicity. 
In theory tele-working -including telerobotics, streaming micro-gestures and other enhancements on telepresence- can cut emissions from physical commuting, including from small remote communities. That assumes the remote community has sufficient telecommunications bandwidth. So if upgrading power, might want to upgrade telecommunications cabling too.
In urban areas can there not be a minimum annual monetary investment (based on population) in infrastructure that will support/contribute to energy efficiency? Think commitment to bicycling, solar, etc. Would need to be done in a business case style manner such that there is a clear return (including energy return of course) on the investments made.
Thanks for your idea! Could you expand a little bit more on how you think this investment should work and how it would support community energy efficiency? 
Mantra's technology, the conversion of CO2 to saleable chemicals (such as formic acid, syngas and others) is one of the few technologies which is business as wellas enviromental friendly. It reduces the cost of energy, it will create jobs and it will provide a carbon neutral environment. Business friendly - with a Tax on Carbon in place and the cost of sequestration of carbon, businesses will be forced to raise it's prices on their products to cover these addition expenditures. By reducing Carbon emissions, Mantra's technology would remove the cost of a Carbon Tax and sequestration, as it would turn a waste product (CO2) to saleable chemicals. This at the same time make the business carbon neutral. This would add revenue to business which in turn would allow them to offer their products at a reduce prices. Economically- business do what business do and pass on their added cost to the end consumer. This in turn takes money out the economy which leads to an economic downturn. Mantra's technology would eliminate those extra expenditures to businesses, thus allowing businesses to charge their customers less for their products. This would free up more expendable capital per individual which would be beneficial for the economy. An addition boost to the economy is that one of Mantra's main by products chemicals is syngas, which can be converted to diesel and home heating fuel. This will drive down the price of both diesel and heating fuel, benefiting businesses and the end consumer thous the over all economy. Job creations. Mantra's technology takes wasteful CO2 and converts it saleable chemicals. It will create jobs because some one will have to build the units, someone will have to maintain the units, some one will have to sell the chemicals, someone will have to gather the chemicals and some will have to transport the chemicals. Jobs. Cleaner energy future. At the very least Mantra's technology is carbon neutral but it also has the potential to greatly reduce carbon from the environment based on what chemicals it produces. I only state Carbon Neutral because certain chemical produced by Mantra's technology especially syngas (the most valuable one can be converted to diesel fuel) eventually will be burned, while others (example formic acid) takes carbon out of the atmosphere and when used puts none back. Currently Mantra Energy is waiting to hear if it was approved for a grant to bring it technology from lab to market at the CCCI in Vancouver. 
Canada needs to support itself and energy east must be built asap. Without energy east we are doing more damage to the climate by purchasing dirty oil and making other counties rich instead of our own. It is a simple concept, support our own first!
Social license is not present for this project. Respect social license and do not try to "manipulate" the communities in favour of this project. 
Your distaste for fossil fuels is obvious. I'm assuming you have completely given up anything associated with or derived from fossil fuels. Like the oil imported into eastern Canada from middle eastern dictatorships. That would be incompatible with your beliefs I'm sure. Tell us how you have cleansed your life of the scourge of fossil fuels? We all want to know.
In order to get the bitumen to market through pipelines, theCO2 emissions should be reduced. The amount of natural gas used to produce the bitumen needs to be decreased significnatly. And the oil being shipped needs to have less asphaltenes in order to be used in more refineries Deasphalted Alberta Bitumen is the ideal complement to the Light Tight Oil now being produced in the USA.See the attached PDF file.
North American energy independence!!!!
Moral authority and oil production do not go into the same sentence. Look at you children and grand-children in the eyes, and tell them you have the technology, the know-how, but that our generation was too greedy to do something about climate changetrying is not an option, acting is...
The argument over whether or not to make breakthroughs in renewable energies is moot, regardless of the climate change debate. Our current energy infrastructure is entirely foundationed in resources that we know are depleting, and will one day be exhausted. The best way to make "fiscal thinking" come in line with a sustainable future is to incentivize the fiscal thinkers. Case in point, the CBC's program "Dragons Den". The fiscal thinking "dragons" turned down an opportunity with an engineer who wanted to build a tidal powered generation station off of the East coast. The only obstacle cited by the dragons was that they would never see return on their investment. They could find no issue, but a monetary issue. In the end they called the engineer crazy, told him that they would love to get drunk with him, but wouldn't give him a plugged nickel. Not a single one of those dragons was able to see that clean, plentiful, sustainable, low environmental impacting energy was something to want to be a part of, because they were afraid of loosing paper and numbers on a computer. No one wants to lose their paper or computer numbers, and that is understandable so it would seem that subsidies are in order. Your next big hurdle comes from Joe working person. They want jobs, and employers want people who are the best for those jobs. This is a main proponent for the old sad story of "when the mill shut down" or "revinew prices tanked" and those people who depended on the industry. The major concern when these economic events or corrections occur, to the normal person, is that they have been compartmentalized, into a specialized part of the work force. A seamstress likely doesn't know how to smelt metal at the refinery, when the automated pants factory comes to town, and the refinery staff likely don't know how to bake cakes at the bakery, when there is no market call for their skill set. The same is true in the energy sector. By insentivising companies to branch out, you will in kind incentivize the work force that supports that company. For example, if Jane Doe's oil company received some sort of tax break or a levy against them laxxed for funding or investing in clean and renewable energy, eventually Jane's Oil Inc. becomes Jane's Energy and Innovation conglomerative. All of a sudden the share holders of Jane's are working toward more efficient solar panels, and miniaturizing wind mills to prevent bird deaths, MSR nuclear power. Suddenly Bob's copper wire consortium and it's share holders are really interested in microwave energy transmission so that they can have their name on the first orbital solar stations. In turn these companies need staff working and engineering towards the prescribed goals. Incentivize them further, by creating training programs and opportunities for existing staff. Create a business environment where less wire being built means more technicians and engineers are needed, instead of more people destitute because the wire factory shut down. We also need common sense in how we get to an all renewable future. Just because there are solar panels, and electric cars that work in California, doesn't mean that they will work everywhere. WIth the point being that if something is going to work in the future, that is not a reason to stop using what works now. As it stands the "No more oil keep it in the soil" mentality leaves a lot of people cold and hungry in the dark. No one through away their bow and arrow when the first musket was introduced, and the same should be expected in the energy sector. Energy is the corner stone of the foundation of modern society. If we take the time and put in the effort to revolutionize energy, society will move with it. If we remove that cornerstone it collapses.
The future of the planet and its living beings are at stake. Let's act now!
- Ted Sargent at U of T - Bryan Koivisto at Ryerson - Ultracapacitor research at INRS-nergie, Matriaux, Tlcommunications, Varennes, QC Swanson's law of photovoltaics suggests that the more gets installed, the cheaper it gets. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Swanson's_law Ultracapacitors and solar panels power the streetlights in Seoul. Why not here? https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=deXK_qs-f4w 
Independent research (not oil and gas) should be subsidized and encouraged. This is an investment!
Fundamental research is critical to generating knowledge - the longest term resource in any innovation based economy. In the transition to a low carbon world, countries that develop (and protect and use) the knowledge, materials, technologies, and turn-key solutions to the energy system of tomorrow will enjoy the economic benefits that steel, oil and gas, and coal giants did in the past century. Time to make this happen!
I have tried to generate interest from several levels of our government with respect to grass roots funding for an energy project. It seems that funding is available, providing that you will commit to investing $750,000.00 yourself in the project. Otherwise, there are a lot of deaf ears being paid as "public servants". This is extremely frustrating as I have designed a wave energy system that makes sense. I am sure that there are many shelved ideas that should be given a chance and to be explored.
Encourage hemp production for seed oil (renewable fuel, biodegradable plastics) and biomass (carbon sequestration). Waste products include food, fibre and pulp from which other industries can be developed, contributing to economic growth.
Hemp and biomass production should be part of the renewable energy sources. 
these are no starters. Reduce demand an move to wind wave solar power.
Thanks for your suggestion! Canada has a program for renewable fuels called the ecoENERGY for Biofuels program. You can find more information on our website here.
Support initiatives that help Canada become energy independent. It is damaging to our economy to send tens of billions of dollars to foreign countries each year. It is also distressing given these other counties have very poor human rights standards as well as lower environmental innovation and regulations.
talking aboututter idiocrasy...we have all these natural resources here and this gov't would rather send money to countries that have poor human rights standards!!!
By supporting our local economy, we can also help reduce the energy needed to transport the resource to us.
Build Energy East!
I would like to see further support for our existing energy sectors. Our oil and gas industry leads the world in technology, safety, environmental policy/protection and ethical work place standards. We should capitalize on our world leading capabilities, and market our selves to the global community as the first class choice when it comes to energy extraction, production and supply. We could then use that unsurpassed advantage to generate revenue and growth with in our country. This would allow us to then have the funds to invest in future energy resources (green energy) and ensure we have a reliable and cost effective alternative when it is required, and allow for a smooth transition.
The new economic growth is in renewable energylet's stop thinking the old way!
Home automation in a growing trend that needs to reach more homes in Canada because of its ability to significantly reduce energy use. With Smart learning thermostats and other home automation technologies devices such as motion sensors, smart vents and smart shades, our homes can literally turn off the lights, or close the vents, or open the shades, or turn down the air conditioning for us. Research shows that this smart gear can reduce 20 percent of a homes energy consumption with little or no behavioral changes. Lets work to bring the cost of these technologies down and more easily accessible to consumers. Why not consider government incentives or rebates to encourage consumer uptake.
That is very expensive and government should have nothing to do with it.
gov't has to realize that until they get their spending under control and stop taxing us to death that we feel that the more we try to help the more the gov't takes our hard earned money away!!! The harder we work the more money trudeau sends away to other countries instead of helping Canadians...in my opinion, with trudeau it's the world and UN first and Canada is in the bottom of the list...and I'm not the only one knowing what's really going on!!!
Time to work with the provinces to change the building code ("a green-sustainable code"). Let's implement!
If Canada is using2/3 of it's energy to heat and cool our homes (as the Energy Quiz says) then it seems fairly obvious that we need ensure all our new housing stock is built to the passive/no net energy standard and as much as is possible the existing stock isrenovated to reduce their energy demands as much as is possible.
Excellent suggestion. European countries such as Finland, Sweden, Germany and Austria have been doing this for a long already and have proven thesustainability and economics of this approach which is clearly a progressive move forward.Canadian provinces, with our abundant forest resources,need notinvent the wheel but simply adopt similar practises to these European passive house standardleaders.
We know what to do. The only link missing is the "political will" People are ready for a transition from non-renewable to renewal energy.
The sooner we take action on changing building codes, we can allow more time for builders to adjust and have new homes have a smaller footprint. It's easier to build net zero homes from the ground rather than changing later
Excellent thoughts; we need a paradigm shift of the people. Codes & standards have historically been built around fixing problems such as failures/collapses/fires so are inherently designed as safety codes although its good to see we now have energy codes gaining traction. i would coin the "smaller footprint" as a "smart footprint" so regardless of size, use, or occupancy; we design, build, and operate with least draw on resources and put-back. Why can we not give back to the planet? ie: we can look at oil sands as dirty oil or we can look at oil sands as the largest oil clean up ever (we are taking oil out of the surface sand and soil, reducing the natural leaching of hydrocarbons in watershed, and putting back cleaned product including planting; we just need to do the process smarter) I encourage and support the vision. Collectively we take small steps; in the same direction. On the passive front, we reduced our electrical consumption by over 20% by moving to LED.
but the old question who is paying for this? Is it worth the 20 to 40% uplift in the price? The science and the practice make sense to me but our present political system is not designed to aid up in this, it is designed to tax us for trying to do this, which is counter productive. we need to move more toward using our resources smarter and more completely than we are at present. Wind and solar tech have not developed to a point that they really should be considered for main stream power based on relibilty issues ,cost, carbon foot print and alot more. We can not continue to subsidize these tech just for the feel good effect, it is harming our population!
Good discussion on an important topic. A reminder: From a 2012 Globe and Mail article: "In 1975, the average size of a house in Canada was 1,050 square feet. Fast forward to 2010 and new homes being built almost doubled to an average of 1,950 square feet. This increase in house size is accompanied by a decrease in the average number of people living in a household. In 1971, it was 3.5; by 2006, that number fell by a full person to 2.5." How many square feet do wereally need? How many empty rooms are heated and cooled across the nation? 
Thanks for your idea! Did you know that Natural Resources Canada is working with our partners and communities across Canada to demonstrate how energy efficient homes and buildings can be? For example, Drake Landing Solar Community, has used solar energy to fulfill 90% of each homes heating requirements in their community. You can find more examples and information on our page here.  Thanks again for contributing!  
There is a huge prize in energy efficiency, but Ronald Middleton is correct that the gains come at a cost. I think the government can help push energy efficiency in 2 key ways: Education and incentives. A lot of efficiency gains can be made at no/ low cost. For example, changing your light bulbs to LEDs and upgrading the insulation in your attic are improvements that will pay for themselves. As people's knowledge of these types of efficiency improvements increases, they will be more willing to implement them. The government could lead a campaign to make Canadians more aware of the efficiency options available to them. Of course, even with knowledge, up front cost can still be a barrier. Government should increase their incentive programs for energy efficiency improvements and make sure people are aware of them. I think this would be a great way to spend some of the carbon tax money being collected.
passive heating is the way to go. ignore the comments telling you it will cost too muc/take too long/require too much effort. if the governments (provincial included) developed certain insulation standards such as R2000 as law, then developers would be forced to stop making shitty houses
Re passive building costs; the passive tech costs are going down while building codes are becoming more stringent increasing those costs so the costs are converging. The generally accepted dates for all building regs to get to passive is 2030. Our challenge is to get that date accelerated. FYI I am attaching the link to NRCAN is working on passive building technology nowhttp://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/emmc/pdf/Building_Smart_en.pdf Also Passive House Canada has lots of information.
Alberta oil is some of the cleanest in the world to produce. Our own oil and gas companies actually care about the environment that they live in and lead the industry in emissions standards. They also invest millions into keeping our air clean. Canada needs to support and use our own oil and gas before shipping it in from countries with abysmal records. Cheaper, cleaner, and more ethical.
Stop subsidies to oil and gas compagnies. The time for transition is now. We got out of the Stone Age not because we ran out of rocks, it was because we found something new and better. We found the "new and better", time for action. 
we need to support our own country, not the Mideast or other exporting countries. Why do the voter of Quebec and Ontario want to pay up to 20 cents a liter more for fuel than what would be if it came from the west. What is not well known is that to refine our oil in Quebec and Ontario, the oil companies need to build delayed Cokers, this would provide 2 to 4 years of work and would provide employment for up to 500 workers. It is a win all the way around.
Alberta oil is not clean, in fact it's more energy intensive than most other types of oil, hence why it's considered unconventional. I love Canada, but I refuse to accept that we need to burn fossils for fuel. We've got much more long-term potential in renewables all over the country, that's what the future will look like.
I'm assuming that [previous commenters] have taken a vow of fossil fuel poverty and do not use any hydrocarbon based products in their daily lives.
Yup ...let's all freeze in the dark ?
Governments should give us more control over our electricity system and stop overspending on subsidies. With solar and wind becoming so cheap, people should be able to purchase their own energy supply and provide a small amount of power back to the grid for free to pay for infrastructure connections. Electricity needs to be clean, reliable, AND affordable. We also need to invest in electricity storage!
The home energy retrofit program needs to be reinstated/expanded . Furthermore, and in Ontario specifically, Global Adjustment charges prove to be a disincentive against saving energy, because it further increases the gap between demand and available generation capacity. We are paying power plants to sit and do nothing and this cost falls back on our energy bills.
Cityplanners of the future will need to re-think their designs. Currently, Canadian cities' are ruled by cars, which contributes to 23% of our GHG emissions. Cities' should be designed for the people, for pedestrians, bikers and possess a community feel - become more "liveable". Increasing urban green space, such as parks, will be needed.In addition, urban green space has a great impact on our health (more space of physical activity) and the environment (filters pollutants). More walkable routes will decrease our need for owning cads. There's no doubt that cities of the future will continue to grow. Space will become a clear issue. We can't keep planning our city based on the need for more public parking space. Urban planners have an opportunity to restructure it to include more pedestrian only streets, expand public transportation, and slowly change people's mindset and habits on how a modern city should function. Canada is vast, there's no denying that. Changing how we movewon't be easy, but we should start thinking about updatingour perception of our future infrastructure needs.
We could use a mix of renewable energy sources (e.g. wind, biomass, wave, solar, etc) to supply our energy
Renewable or potentially perpetual energy sources such as wind/solar and others not as prevalent such as leveraging planet rotation should be explored; but with caution. The caution example is geothermal wherein drawing heat from the earth's upper crust may have other unintended impacts ie: geothermal capture in some parts of the world has caused mud pools, geysers to slow/stop thereby changing the risk of future eruptions; some wind capture turbines have been noted as having high number of bat fatalities.
Wave energy is overlooked in our race towards clean energy. Calculations on the potential are staggering. There are millions of tons of rising and falling water in a very small area, and wave action is unrelenting. For those who are familiar with the Limpet and Mutriku wave energy converters (electricity generators), these systems rely on a "blowhole" design where air captured from a wave is blown through a turbine on a rising wave and then reverses the airflow as the wave drops. Generators maintain the same direction of rotation via an inefficient Wells turbine blade. I have developed a system that will improve upon those systems on several levels, including: applying both vacuum and air pressures simultaneously to an efficient turbine blade design, generators can be located away from damaging elements, generator rpm is continuous and energy output adjusts automatically with wave heights. I just need the right people to listen.
Thanks for your suggestion! Canada has a Clean Energy Fund program that works to ensure a healthy environment and supports clean energy research. You can find more information here. One of the projects that you might find interesting is the West Coast Wave Initiative (WCWI) by the University of Victoria, created to study the energy we can collect from waves in Canadian waters. More information can be found on their project page. 
1. Build pipelines. Without a good pipeline infrastructure we lose on two fronts a.) royalty revenues lost from the heavily discounted crude that we sell to the USA, we could be getting market prices for our resources. b.) paying out higher prices for imported oil that we don't need to import because we have it here already. On the social aspect we are also helping to support countries that have terrible human rights and worker safety practices. Building pipelines will also cut down the carbon footprint required to transport our crude and create good paying jobs all across the country. 2. Alberta energy industry was created with the Hep of public funds. So why should we not pair the energy industry's with our governments again. Our refineries are old and or not feasible to start again. They are too costly for any one company or multiple companies to invest in building as the ROA is too far down the line. However with the knowledge and expertise of the energy industries and the backing of government support a great partnership could be built with building new modern energy efficient refineries. All of these can be places in several places across Canada from North to south, east, central and west. Large quantities of skilled jobs would be created, from academia, science and technology, trades and labourers. The tax revenues from these jobs will fund government and partial profits and or loans from the government to fund these project would also come back. So this case it would be a double dip(so to speak) for the government.  3. Inspire new innovations. Provide energy companies tax insensitives for funding research and development of new cleaner technologies. Energy companies will also make the switch to other forms of energy when the time is right. Help them want to start developing this sooner than later. More funding for research and development will help ideas become realities.  Canada has done a lot a lot of things right with our energy sectors. We should take the lead and show the world how this can be done the right way and the most environmentally beneficial way. We really are leaders and innovators here. Much of what has been learned and designed in Canada is now used by our competitors.
Vey true we have to stop exporting our brains and ideas and start using them at home. We as a whole are one of the most innovative societies on eath, but we keep being shoved into the shadows of the Americans, we need to step into the light.
Great points. I think the Canadian oil & gas industry has become incredibly politicized, particularly in recent years with the debate over Keystone XL and oilsands production. This is unfortunate because it obscures the fact that, as you mentioned,Canada's energy industryhas some of the highest environmental and ethicalstandards in the world.We do ourselves a great disservice by holding back ournatural gasand conventional oilproducers fromreaching their full potential in the name of climate goals. All we ultimately achieve by doing so is allowing other countries (many of which are dictatorships with terrible human rights records)to sell more of their sizeable oil & gas reservesinto the global market. We ultimately end up with the same amount of global carbon emissions and negative effects on our climate, but have funded authoritarian governments in the process rather than investing in our ownsociety here at home.
Can't disagree more with this. Every time Ihear that we're building more pipelines, I can't help but think how useless they'll be in 5-10 years. Youdon't have to be a business analyst to see that oil will not be worth extracting via the most expensive method (tar sands) in the coming decade.  Climate change is real. My children need to live in aworld that isn't a complete mess.
Some great points here but I mostly disagree. I think we are already dangerously over invested in oil and gas infrastructure. The future low-carbon energy systems are coming much faster than many think. For example some predict a transformation of the automobile industry with self-driving electric vehicles providing transportation as a service by 2030. Solar and wind energy costs keep dropping. Saudi Arabia is investing in solar. Fossil fuels are finite and climate change is real. More pipe-lines and refinery capacity is a dead end leaving our kids with stranded assets and a climate catastrophe.
I completely disagree with this idea as well. It provides no help for reducing our carbon emissions and would definitely do the opposite, pushing us further down the path of climate change and global warming. I don't think enraging other nations by not following through on our global climate agreements is a good idea either. Please see the global reaction to US & Trump leaving Paris Agreement.
Love it! Great idea!
I agree.GHG is a global issue.No matter what we do in Canada, it will haveno measurable impact on global climate. Sad but true. Canadaalready absorbs 20-30% more carbon than we emit.Exporting our vast oil reserves to the global market will generate funds needed so that ourtiny and environmentally conscious country can realize all of theenvironmentally friendly ideas we have.Interesting to note that there are 600,000,000 people currently living in India without electricity. Whenthey can afford it,will their first car be electric? Nope. Theircars will run on petroleumand their electricity will come from coal. Any action we take locally in Canada will sadly be offset by several orders of magnitude by India/China/US/EU.If Canada is to makeany difference at all, globally, we must befocus on helping developing countries, say, by exporting liquid natural gastooffset India'sfuture massive increase in coal use.These countrieswill dictate our future.
Oil and hundreds of petroleum products will be used for many decades to come.
We need to use new pipeline technology instead of the 50 plus year old rotting ones we have. that is why we are having the leaks, they ( the pipelines from 50 years ago) are breaking down. There is new technology that we can use to insure that leaks do not happen and it will buy us some time to convert over to green energy. Right now trains on railways older than 50 years and often in disrepair, are carrying the crude through our cities,countryside and small towns, derailments are more common than pipeline leaks. Trucks haul crude through our country as well, are all those trucks in good working order? no issues with loose wheels, worn brakes or poor upkeep? Now I'm not saying that this is all the time, but it happens more than we think. We need to buy some time to convert over to green energy and technology and it is preferable to use updated smart pipelines to do it rather than rely on 50 year old aging technology that has issues.
In the business world the number 1 Priority is money, and fear. There are many opportunities to reduce or eliminate our energy consumption today. Most people in business are choosing to maintain status quo rather than taking a risk or thinking out of the box. 
Mostofour ridiculously high personal energy consumption is a result ofdysfunctional urban planning and development caused by corrupt and incompetent political systems. As a result we have millions of younger people who can onlyafford to live in clusters of massive ugly glass fishbowl condos with horrible energy efficiencyin areaswith no employment, poorlocal shopping,and that have no hope ofbeing connected to effective transportation. And on the other hand we havemillions of baby boomers andolder whoown inefficient detached houses that until recently were powered by cheap electricity paid for with massive government borrowing (hydro/nuclear) and smog belching coal plants, but whonow cannot afford to pay their billsand want young taxpayers to pay for subsidies and renovations so they can afford tostay in their million dollar houses and collectpensions that younger people will never get....but I digress... The only meaningful andcontinuous improvements in energy consumption, local employment and quality of lifewill need to come from effective political structures that supportintelligent planning and coordinated development (by world class planners/engineers...not some quick buck developers and political hacks!) of public transit and density, includingstaged expropriations of low density housing and business along current and planned transit corridors.
The smart city wins are well known. Look to the studies done in the UK, what Scandinavia already does, and the work of the Federation of Canadian Municipalities (I don't work with them, promise). It's all about votes, and in parallel - time and money. How do we convince a city, province, and country to double down for the long term? ... to overcome the possibility of a slight lost benefit from, for example, a better highway to the suburbs tomorrow - in exchange for greater energy efficiency, walkability, and greener spaces, for those in a high population density area? How do we overcome political sales pitches of short term, damaging, slashes to energy bills... in favor of a long term vision for a greener, more efficient, more equitable system that integrates big data, transit needs, energy use, and neighborhood design that may add $100 to your annual bill for a few years?
Improved codes and plan requirements for all new construction to be be net zero by 2035-40 and provide generous rebates for existing buildings and homes to become net zero or near net zero by 2035-40
Im not an expert, but high altitude wind power seems like an interesting next generation non-emitting energy technology that could have some interesting applications across Canada. Im sure there are a number of technical hurdles to overcome, but looking out over the course of a generation I could see this as a potential energy source we rely on in paricular areas across Canada such as rural and remote communities and off-grid industries. Here's an intersting video and lots more examples on YouTube. https://m.youtube.com/watch?v=kldA4nWANA8
I agree it's a cool idea. Challenges - yes. Other cheaper, more readily deployable, easier, equally non-emitting options - also yes. Definitely doesn't mean we shouldn't pass by investigating longer term concepts, however. Maybe, for example, the control systems designed will have other more short term wins - possibly controlling kites to pull cargo ships? Investigative R&D where we have domestic expertise is a strong investment.
Establish an extensive, flexible incentive system to promote the adoption of new technologies that do more for less, for longer. Electric (or non-fossil-fuel) transportation Solar/ wind/ hydro/ etc. electricity generation Manufacturing improvements Etc. This strategy has a high-cost short term, but a major infrastructure improvement over long-term. This would create jobs and bolster momentum towardsachieving climate and energy goals. #ElonMusk
So many programs at different levels of government working towards this end... but when competing with the overwhelming established status-quo, I agree with you.. seems there needs to be so much more to make the best of the amazing technology options already available for massive scale-up. Wouldn't it be nice if some sufficiently strong economic instrument were able to level the playing field and incentivize the best performing options at the same time? Will carbon pricing, with the current plan to slowly increase, do just this? Seems so hard to say.
What the government gives to one person they must first steal from another
Many Northern communities across Canada are struggling with dirty, high-cost diesel power systems. By 2050, these communities should be transitioned to a mixture of renewable baseload and variable energy. To get there we need to scale up prototype testing now - to install clean energy (with biomass, solar, wind, combined heat and power, efficiency) as old infrastructure starts to be decommissioned. Canada can not only improve environmental and social outcomes for Canadians, but create new industries for cold-energy technologies and market them to Russia, Europe, America, etc.
I would love to see a cost comparison between the status quo (diesel fired power) vs a mix of renewables plus batteries. Has anyone come across such studies?
How about "enhanced geothermal"? This system uses the same hydraulic fracturing technology as used in the oil and gas industries, but rather than looking for oil you are interested in the heat from the rocks. At a depth of 2000 - 5000 meters the rock is hot enough to generate steam for a renewable energy power plant. The best part with geothermal power is that it is consistent and dispatchable (i.e. baseload power). 
Cost comparisons? Well, they are currently using diesel. That usually means its cheaper or better suited than any of the other methods. Its likely people don't worry that it is dirty when they need power when its -45C.  
The federal and provincial governments should invest in and encourage private investment in the research and development of large-scale energy storage systems to be used in conjunction with wind and solar energy generation systems. This will further reduce our need for nuclear and carbon-emitting energy sources.
Absolutely - and not just storage for a few hours. In remote communities we need storage that will last for months.
Indeed, energy storage is a valuable assetinany sustainable energy system. For many parts of Canada, a possible alternative to storage could be better integration of provincial electricity networks. For example: if wind stops blowing in Ontario, instead of firing up the gas power plants or using expensive storage, you could import cheap hydro electricity from Quebec. A snippet from Clean Energy Canada 2016 Tracking The Energy Revolution report(page 16): "In Canada, electricity systems are largely the domain of individual provinces. Cooperation between the provinces on power production and transmission has proven tricky political terrain to navigate." The report highlights some of the recent milestones towards greater electricity system integration.
In the prairie Provinces roughly half of GHG emissions in the buildings sector (both residential and commercial/institutional) comes from heating alone. We have long, cold winters, and we rely on natural gas for heating. However, we also have an incredible solar resource in the summer. Seasonal energy storage using solar thermal in a community-scale system has been demonstrated in Okotoks, Alberta, in a subdivision called Drake Landing (https://www.dlsc.ca/). Last year the community met 100% of their heating needs using solar heat stored in the ground in a borehole field. I think this type of smart energy community could go a long way to reducing Canada's GHG emissions. I wonder if we could also view the winter cold as a resource to store for use in the hot summer? 
"I wonder if we could also view the winter cold as a resource to store for use in the hot summer?" --from the comment above I read from a few sources (you can Google it for yourself too) that people actually used to do just that: they would cut blocks of ice from waterways, cover them in hay or sawdust, and store the blocks in big buildings for use in the summer. I don't know if that's the best modern-day solution, but it's an interesting starting point.
We have a great deal of storage capacity in the form of hydro dams.  But further grid stiffening in the form of large-scale batteries does make sense. 
NS has an efficiency cooperation operating under the utility review broad to support reduction in energy use. It recognizes that reduced consumption is the least expensive way to achieve GHG reductions and other benefits.  
Reduced consumptionis easier in some areas of the country than it is in others. Are you suggesting that we all move to Vancouver and Vancouver Island so that we can turn off our natural gas and furnace fans 9 months of the year? 
Every degree we turn down the temperature while we heat our homes and turn up the temperature on the air conditioner, people can help reduce consumption. Further, by insulation and strategic planning, the need for heat could be reduced.
We often talk about daily recurring consumption reduction efforts: reducing the thermostat by one or two degrees, turning off the lights as you exit a room, or shutting downthe computer when leaving the office. All of these small actions add up and should certainly be encouraged. But there are also notable raremoments in everyone's life that have a disproportionate impact on theirenergy consumption. For example: when you buy a property. If you decide to buya 2,500 square foot house outside of town instead of a 1,000 square foot apartment accessible by public transportation, your energy consumption will be drastically higher for years to follow. Another example is when you buy a car: all of those SUVs people are buying instead of more compact vehicles... Reducing energy consumption by turning down the thermostat a degree or two in a home that is mostly unoccupied... Let's not miss the forest from the trees. Thoughts?
Reducing consumption does not follow the average Canadian's habits. Also, it does not maintain the Canadian tax base (property tax), nor our consumption and GDP levels that we currently see. Policies that encourage this are hard to implement as they may require governments to downsize.
Why is wave energy overlooked? It is likely the most consistent available resource on the planet. Every new breakwater project should be built with my Wavekiss system integrated into it's construction. Not only will my system generate electricity on land, it has the potential to supplement the propulsion and electricity generation for marine vessels. I estimate that an anchored freighter will potentially produce about 30kw of continuous power in only 4 inch waves. Imagine the savings at sea! I need partners to move forward with my "patent pending" system to a "proof of concept" level. The Canadian governments are no help at all to a "grass roots" inventor like myself. Read the attachment and comment or contact me. 
The transition to renewable energy alternatives requires significant innovation and research. Academics need funding to carry out this research. Thus, the government should: -Create incentives for researchers to work on clean energy projects -Provide more funding to clean energy research programs at universities -Support partnerships between academics and industries such that applicable research is conducted
Thanks for your comment! Natural resources Canada is currently funding a lot of renewable energy demonstration projects to gather information about how best to use renewable energy in the future. You can find more information here. 
A leading Canadian company in BC (International Wastewater) has developed an innovative technology to capture heat from the water going down the drain from sinks, showers and toilets and transfers it to the clean water coming into the building. There is a rediculous amount of heat that is going down the drain that is being lost. G&M article I read quotes a2005 U.S. Dept of Energy study that estimated 350 billion kw-hours of heat energy is flushed down the drains in the US each year. The technology is already being deployed around the world and in a number of spots in BC. Also saving users a lot of money in reduced energy costs. 2-3 year payback period and works well in condos, buildings and dense cities where solar/wind are challenging. Need to be looking at what we can do to support Canadian tech like this. See video:https://m.youtube.com/watch?v=DATn4kjzxEo
Great idea! An ongoing residential/commercial development project in Ottawa comes to mind: Zibi. They are aiming fora zero carbon footprint. One of the ways that they hope to achieve this is by using an innovative water piping systemthat willtransfer the heat of outgoing waste water to the incoming water (essentially pre-heating the incoming water). Zibi will also be using the waste heat from a nearby paper mill. Very cool stuff. Are cities investigating and possible mapping industrial sources of waste heat? Could be a worthwhile project...
Thanks for your idea! The technology sounds very promising and we look forward to doing more research into its uses.  Natural Resources Canada has also created publications that let Canadians know how to recover wasted heat. We welcome any additional comments you may have on this topic.
Video.
AOSTRA, an Alberta/Federal creation of Peter Lougheed, advanced the technology of/for the oilsands. An analagous, new energy technology development funding mechanism is warranted to advance undeveloped NWT hydro potential, a national East/West, NWT/East HVDC Power Grid and new value-added upgrading of Canada's energy potential.
There is little chancefor Canada to compete against the likes of China/India/US/Europe to manufacture solar and wind, but there are still some huge clean tech opportunities that we can capture. Building up niche domestic industries around energy storage (supported by domestic mineral extraction), cold-weather technology, carbon sequestration, marine renewables, biomass, petrochemicals, etc. We need to find tech that integrates into existing supply-chains - that takes advantage and builds off of our industry that already exists. New revenue, new jobs, and better environmental outcomes!
We are on the verge of an energy revolution. We are seeing the shift from a fossil intensive electricity grid to cleaner more renewable one. The challenges of this dynamic shift brings about a new mindset and a new way of thinking. This way of thinking brought ides such as energy efficiency, where we reduce consumption or reduce waste. We also start thinking of application based, PV for electricity, solar thermal for heat. We need to understand the fundamentals of energy conversion, energy efficiency, and off-course cost effectiveness of the technologies. We must think of each technology and how to effectively utilize that technology optimally and identify areas for development. For example, churches have ideal roof surface areas and angles for solar installation. Furthermore, the energy consumption profile of the inside of the church building exhibits moderate energy usage and a surge on Sundays and sometimes Wednesdays (assumptions). Battery storage provide high power density in a short amount of timemaking itthe ideal technology for electricity storage.This way of thinking came about at a crucial time and providing funding and support for research and academia is crucial.
Invest in hydrogen production. Use surplus electricity to charge batteries and create hydrogen. Install electric vehicle charging stations EVERYWHERE. 
Why give away our natural resources that we need within our country just to go buy the same from other countries? We need a national pipeline for oil, natural gas and electricity! Stop giving our western oil away while importing foreign oil into the east! Stop giving our eastern electricity away while we import it in the west. Stop giving our water away when we have droughts in the west! Use 100% of what we have BEFORE selling or giving it away to other countries!
Combat climate change. Every dollar you spend is a vote for either clean energy or for a polluting alternative. Pledge to purchase only zero carbon capital goods in order to drive demand and scale. Electric vehicles, heat pumps, electric water heaters, electric stoves, electric garden tools are excellent replacements for their polluting predecessors.
If the consumers show that we want change, companies and businesses will listen. Without change, nothing will happen.
In the places where electricity is still generated by coal, electric appliances and vehicles are actually dirtier than ones that use other fossil fuels such as natural gas.
There are no ZERO carbon goods. 
We have years of data and proposals from researchers across Canada, and most prominently, The Way Forward: A Practical Approach to Reducing Canadas Greenhouse Gas Emissions, authored by Canada's top energy researchers and policymakers and distributed through the Canadian government initiated Ecofiscal Commission. Ways to make us more efficient, use less fossil fuels, increase renewable energy, integrate energy sources, build energy infrastructure, costing and financing the renewable energy transition, and more. We should be implementing what the best minds in Canada have been working on as their life's work.
It's unfortunate that the research is commonly ahead of what the politicians are willing to do.
For reference, the recommendations outlined in the mentioned report are: 1. All Canadian provinces should put a price on carbon.2. Plan for policies to ramp up over time.3. Make coverage as broad as practically possible.4. Root policies in provincial context, with an eye to moving toward national coordination. (source) It looks like Canada is going in the right direction :)
Thanks for sharing information about The Way Forward report. For others who would like to know more, you can find it here. We are very interested to know if others have thoughts about the ideas raised in this report. Keep the ideas coming!
Community solar programs like Grid Solar or Solarize can help families deploy solar on their rooftops and save money. Community solar programs can reduce the deployment of solar energy by a substantial amount. Solar panels are getting cheaper every year and solar energy is now the cheapest source of energy in many countries. The objective of these programs will be to offer a solar rooftop at $1 / watt. A typical family will need a 5 to 10 Kw system, community solar programs will make it easier for families to obtain competitive financing for the solar programs. The community solar programs will reduce the overhead and soft costs of installing solar  (marketing, administration, permitting) to a minimum. Community solar can help reach all of the objectives: - Create jobs in the solar sector installation sector, deploying solar energy will provide jobs for solar panel installers, solar system designers and business managers. The supply chain for solar panels, inverters and components will also be a good source of good paying jobs. Canada is home to leading solar panel plants and leading edge inverter makers. We need to encourage more entrepreneurs to enter the sector, this is the best time to enter the field. - Maintain affordable price for energy. Solar energy is now the cheapest source of energy, electricity from solar energy was offered for a price of 2.9 cents / KwH, this is lower than Natural gas. This price was offered in the UAE, Chili, and Morroco which have better insolation but the Sun also shines in Canada (as seen in the attached image) and as panel prices continue to decline we can expect a similar price in Canada. Successful community solar PV projects already exist such as ( http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/energy/funding/current-funding-programs/cef/4967 ), this initiative will encourage more community solar PV projects and help coordinate between them to facilitate group buys and sharing of best practices. 
Increase the infrastructure for electric vehicles, invest in the electrification of our transportation sector to reduce emissions and build more transit infrastructure for cycling.
If you reside someplace or simply are stopped or resting. As a Canadian you should feel a Canadian spirit/vibe.
In today's society, there are many hurdles to increasing the level of active transportation in our communities. As well as helping the transition to a clean energy future, active transportation provides health, social, and economic benefits to a community. Standards and guidelines, infrastructure, regulations, human resources, and legislation are real issues for advancing active transportation.
There are so many benefits to improving electricity trade between provinces and territories - taking advantage of resources (e.g., wind, solar, large hydro) and improving reliability tops among them. I know a lot of thought has gone into this topic recently but people need to start building connections today so that we can reap the benefits tomorrow (and not ten years from now). Long term it will be about taking advantage of potential advancements in smart grids (energy storage, etc.).
Motivate people through the use of incentives and understanding the benefits and value of their actions vs. the current method of providing disincentive through additional "sin" taxation.
To be Canadian, is to Be strong
We need radical, transformative breakthroughs to ensure we remain a global energy powerhouse while tackling our climate change obligations. How do we incentivise radical, transformative ideas? What about the NRG COSIA Carbon X-PRIZE as an example of a policy instrument to encourage innovation?http://carbon.xprize.org/ orCarbon X-Prize
I agree with this approach, but I think there are some benefits in putting in place guidelines (I shy away from restrictions because I think we want to focus the efforts on feasible/usable/plausible solutions, rather than allowing ideas that won't get traction or be used due to ease of use or cost barriers).  Great idea!
The food sector is a major user of energy and is very reliant on fossil fuels to grow, process, and transport food products to consumers. Investing in innovative projects to increase the use of renewable energy and improve energy efficiency in the food system, including agricultural production and transportation, could make a significant impact for Canadas future. Supporting projects that increase access and markets for local food would also help to create jobs and decrease Canadas carbon footprint.
This is a great idea!
As our building codes become more stringent we need to guide the built environment to focus on passive building solutions were we can first reduce the total heating and cooling demands. By first optimizing building envelopes we can then reuse any "waste" heat that is produced in our buildings. With these optimized we can then focus on the active systems. We have for too long relied on active systems for energy efficiency. By mandating a requirement for heating and cooling demand we will be ensuring that our new buildng stock does not dramatically increase our total energy demand in cities as they grow more and more. Based on the National Energy Board's report "Canada's Energy Future 2016" residential and commerical building energy intensity is slightly decreasing however the total is forecastedto increase 0.3 percent. We need to be more aggressive on these energy efficiency requirements to allow space for renewables to make up more of the energy supply. Having low energy buildings can allow for renewables to have a larger impact on our energy sector todrive innovation. It is this innovation that can help grow the economy and create more sustainable jobs that are aimed at energy efficiency and renewable energy.
Thank you for your idea! Canadas Clean Energy Fund Program has funded a project about waste heat recovery that works on converting waste heat into electricity. You can find more information here.  
Integration of CanadianSolar Tree Arrays & Vortex Bladeless (small) Wind Turbines into residential communities systematically connected to "shared" Tesla Powerwalls will allow for reduction of household (& community buildings) energy requirements. This is green energy.This will create engineering jobs.This willbe funded by household fees to connect to the system (As long as the fees are less than the cost of energy received this is viable).Challenges: Engineering, Off-setting initial system costs, promoting household participation.Proposed Solution: Hold a government lottery for communities to collaboratively pay for a ticket to win this Energy Solution System for their community!Please See:http://www.canadiansolar.com/na/http://www.vortexbladeless.comhttps://www.tesla.com/en_CA/powerwall?redirect=no
It wasn't that long ago we handled our trash by piling it up on a plot of land. After awhile of getting tired of the sight, the smell and the increase in vermin., we decided to use the scientific technique called "out of site out or mind approach". We buried it, figuring what we can't see wouldn't hurt us. Boy, were we wrong. Methane deposited built up and exploded, underground water supplies became undrinkable and once rich soil became contaminated. Something had to be done that was more friendly to the environment yet didn't put a burden on us economically. We put our heads together and came up with a better way, recycling. What recycling did was to take the trash business and make it more environmental friendly. It did this by us separating contaminates from the trash and by reusing certain trash to make saleable products which in turn greatly reduced the amount of trash being buried. It also reduced a major economical burden to communities. Before the communities were spending large sum money to rid of the trash and not receiving any thing economically back. Recycling, gave certain trash economic value which communities could realize possible revenue from. Which brings us to CO2 reduction. The current approach where most of the research dollars are being spent to rid ourselves of wasteful CO2 is by sequestrating. Sequestrating is the gathering of CO2, taking to a designated site and burying it. Letting future generations worry about it's side effects to the environment. Sound familiar. Sequestrating, put a major economic burden on business, individuals and the government without any economic return to them. So what to do. Recycle. Currently there is small Canadian company that just may have the solution. Mantra Energy Alternative Ldt, whose technology carbon conversion is lab proven to turn wasteful CO2 to saleable marketable chemicals. While the government waste billions of dollars trying to find ways to sequestrate CO2 , Mantra Energy Alternative's technology carbon conversion sits on the lab shelf. What does carbon conversion do for the environment and the economy. By converting CO2 waste to chemicals it eliminates the need of the economic burden of sequestrating of CO2. By converting CO2 to chemicals, CO2 produced by fossil burning companies would be greatly reduced going in to the atmosphere. The chemicals produce have saleable value which would bring additional revenues to the companies and reduce prices to their consumers. Unlike sequestrating, which offers no economic benefits, jobs created by carbon conversion would be self paying by the chemicals produced and sold. It is time we learn from history. The history of the trash business has shown us the path that should be taken. We should stop trying to bury our problem of excess CO2 and take steps to recycle it. We can start by investing in lab proven technologies such as Mantra Energy Alternatives ldt.  
This is a good suggestion, but finding ways to reduce the amount of CO2 is the more permanent, and environmentally friendly solution for the long run.


We need web tools from credible sources to help people to make clean energy decisions. To choose an example, should I buy an EV now? It turns out it would fit my lifestyle well and I would save a lot of money over the life of a vehicle if I did (and I will buy one). A simple web tool could let people fill in the blanks with their personal numbers. What are the economics of a home PV solar system today? Would a Tesla Power Wall pay for itself? Data such as solar panel and battery prices and price projections would need to be updated regularly. We need a source to create these tools. A group of individuals might be most credible. I think many would doubt government and corporate sources. I believe that a lot of people would movevery quickly towards Clean Energy choices if they had a way of getting information that was trusted and useful for their individual situations. Any interest?
We have developed a green technology that massively reduces exhaust gases by improving the fuel combustion, and we have an independent Australian government approved laboratory test to prove it. We reduced CO by 84%. We also have many of our own tests I tested a diesel powered scoop tram used in underground mining operations and reduced both the CO and NO2 by over 70% I have the Draeger printouts to back this up  Our problem is that we don't have cash to pursue this, and we don't seem to qualify for any government grant monies because we don't have two employees. Therefore we haven't been able to pursue testing in Canada. It seems a bit strange that governments want new technology ideas but have rules in place that would prevent these technologies from being generated by new startups. So far, my emails to Provincial and Federal government ministries requesting an audience have fallen mostly on deaf ears and blind eyes. Since you are asking for input, I trust you will be interested in following through with this. Alberta responded, and said "Thanks, keep up the good work, we're fixing the problem by applying a new tax." That will fix nothing. Technology is what fixes problems, and we have the technology. Saskatchewan replied by saying they had forwarded my email to appropriate Minister's. And I've heard nothing. McKenna's office, after months of me waiting, and finally finding a voice on the phone who said they were five months behind in their emails, asked me to resubmit to her personally. So far... nothing  All of these were over eight months ago  It appears these agencies aren't really very involved in pursuing a true solution. I trust you are.
In my preliminary investigative research, I chanced upon an idea of protecting coral while at same time helping the environment and the energy sector. How? Corals can absorb carbon to help deter the acidification of oceans. Coral processes carbon during photosynthesis to create its own food and generate energy. I believe that coral and its zooxanthallae can be a good future source of energy that can be harness to light our homes, turned the machines to work and make life easier and more convenient. In other words, another source of energy. Currently, I'm trying to work on it and proposes the idea to my dear alma mater in Lublin, Poland and in Freiburg, Germany. I really believe in the potential of coral/zooxanthallae as an energy source that could be harvested using electrolyte (or similar process) like a car battery. I was alarmed to learn that there are ongoing underwater mining activities in the deep-sea affecting some of the most precious resources our good earth provided. We only have two choices: either we help protect the ocean resources or harvest them into depletion. I also read about an article of fishermen harvesting corals to create jewelries. What is the relevance, I asked myself. It is a connected ocean (bodies of water) and we only have ourselves to blame (in our time) if we remain complacent to the issues. Science can always help.
It is a connected bodies of water, whichever which way we think about it. Ocean trash in one country could affect the waters of another country. Carbon absorbed by the ocean in one country could pollute the entire water system of its neighbors. Potable water is a significant issue, not only today, but since the days man learned how to make use of it for drinking, for irrigation or for simple household use. Nature's natural defense, the forests and the coral formation under the sea, therefore should be taken with utmost importance. Government policies in managing renewable resources should be given utmost priority to restore public trust. 
My idea is to design a wind blade that's appropriate for places frequented by strong and destructive natural calamities. Aside from saving lives, it could create jobs through innovation. Countries in the Asia-Pacific region are frequented by strong typhoons all-year round. In the Philippines, for example, there are at least 20 typhoons or tropical storms that visit the country with varying strength and intensity. More true than false, access to big market for wind turbine deployment is hindered by this natural phenomenon. Therefore, there is a need to design wind turbines that can withstand typhoon and tropical depression without adverse effect to its intended objective  energy generation. The table below shows the different categories and their corresponding sustained wind equivalent significant as design factors. The Philippines, Japan, United States and the Micronesia are a big source of wind turbine deployment. But, as mentioned, offshore deployment is limited to waters less than 50 metres deep. And these sites with strongest winds are ruled out because of the enormous challenge that requires large quantities of capital and the extreme weather condition.
Bridging the Skills Gap for a Smooth Transition to Clean Energy Over the past few years, there has been a continuous upward trend in clean energy technological breakthroughs, an unimpeded downward trend in the price of solar panels, great leaps in innovative wind turbine technology and an acceptance of the green energy economys potential. Recently, however, we have realized that there arent enough experts and skilled people to handle all the renewable and sustainable energy jobs, whether it be in planning, policy making, design, engineering, construction or maintenance. There is also an obvious lack of specialized training and appropriate courses in many parts of the world. So how do we bridge the skills gap in order to transition to clean energy?
This is an op-ed in the Globe And Mail (Dec 2016):http://www.theglobeandmail.com/report-on-business/rob-commentary/canada-well-on-its-way-to-a-renewable-energy-future/article33424984/ based on peer-reviewed/published research detailed here:http://wellbeing.ihsp.mcgill.ca/publications/2016RSER/  In 2016, renewable energy surpassed coal as the largest source of installed power capacity in the world. Chinas carbon emissions peaked. The German upper house, the Bundesrat, voted to ban gasoline-powered cars by 2030. Vancouver chose to outlaw natural gas in new buildings by the same year. These are among the many signs the world is moving toward kicking its carbon habit, possibly by mid-century  a shift that would represent the simplest way to combat climate change. Canada faces a paradox in this regard. We are a large country with many resources, a small population and we already produce 10 per cent of the worlds hydro power, so you might think we could easily power ourselves with 100-per-cent renewable energy. On the other hand, most of our territory is not connected to electrical grids nor near population centres. In addition, we are energy hogs, in part owing to our need for heating and transportation that comes with a northern climate and dispersed population. So far, the deployments of hydro, solar and wind energy in Canada have been made in the highest-yielding locations. It is natural for the low-hanging fruit to be picked first. What is next? Now that Justin Trudeaus government will ensure a uniform national carbon price, the question is, will it be just about tightening our belts or will it hasten a bountiful supply of renewable energy? This depends on an old puzzle in economics: Future renewable-power installations could either get cheaper, because we have learned from earlier practice and technology development, or they could get more expensive, since the best spots for steady wind, reliable solar and proximity to existing power distribution and population centres are already taken. To answer this, a student and I mapped each provinces remaining low-hanging fruit of renewables in the form of wind, solar, wave, tidal and some biomass energy. We compared this with total energy use, including electricity, transportation, heating and industrial production. The bottom line: There is plenty of renewable-energy potential near current roads, power lines and population centres. Most of it is wind power, with plenty of hydro and solar as well. In fact, every province except Alberta and Ontario has a large surfeit  enough to be choosy about siting installations to minimize environmental side-effects. Indeed, the boom and associated savings should be big enough to amply help workers and communities in transition. For instance, were Newfoundland to develop the easily accessible part of its truly enormous wind resources and to export the power, it would generate an annual income of $200,000 a household. While carbon pricing helps push this kind of investment, the market costs of building and of running wind and solar power are dropping, on their own, faster than policy is moving. That makes a shift to renewable power inevitable. By 2022, it will simply be cheaper to build and provide a gigawatt of wind power than the cheapest fossil-fuel alternative, and solar will be just behind. Because wind and solar are technologies, not fuels, their costs will continue to drop as time goes on. What about transportation, which still relies on liquid fuels? Our analysis assumes nearly complete electrification, a recently fanciful idea that is now already in motion. Electric cars have numerous advantages and are transforming the market faster than hybrids did. They say if you want to know what the future will be like, you should look at what investments are being made today. Judging by the accelerating rate of private-sector wind and solar investment here and elsewhere, it seems for Canada this trend is unlikely to stop until all our energy needs are met by clean electricity.
Recently I found out that the province of Ontario hands out a 14.5 thousand tax credit for people who buy electric cars. I also found out that the current electric car uses lithium batteries which are mined using highly intensive carbon emitting equipment and that, compared to a gasoline car's life span, an electric car only reduces emissions by about 25 percent.  This got me think about another use for the 14 thousand tax credit given out by the province and that is investing that money to help home owners set up solar panels such as the ones used in Elon Musks solar city.  Home owners would be willing to invest to reduce electric costs which is great but also the excess power absorbed by the panels would feed into the electrical grid meaning it will provide the city and county with more power.   The more homes do this the more power we can generate and the less we can rely on other means of power which not only cost money to maintain but cost a lot more to scale.  The wonderful thing about this setup is that home owners would recharge their home batteries very quickly at home in the morning and since no one is at home usually that power gets fed into the grid to power commerical government or other business locals which would be the place where the home owners work.
Canada is basically a young nation compared to many countries in Europe. It didn't chose to develop its railway system as much as Europe did simply because it has the energy (fossil fuel) to sustain its needs. But, things chance ... Canada has to look for more sustainable ways to provide its citizens with an efficient and more affordable transport system that will create jobs and keep energy affordable. The idea is to connect cities by rail - little by little - to reach the remotest part of the nation where needed. It has to be done to transport people and commodities at the most convenient and cost-efficient way.
Nearly three decades ago an ASHRAE Journal article (September, 1989) began with the following observation: Application of radiant principles is one of the best kept secrets of the 20th century. Why is this surprising? Because people do not know that, in many applications, radiant heating can reduce energy costs by 30 per cent or more with equal comfort. In 2002, the final report on Annex 37 of the International Energy Agencys Energy Conservation in Buildings and Community Systems Program stated that radiant delivery optimizes thermal comfort in our built environment, with the least use of exergy, the quality aspect of energy. That report pointed out that the models we use to predict energy use in buildings ignore the quality aspect of energy.  today calculations of energy use in buildings are based solely on the energy conservation principle, the first law of thermodynamics the method of exergy analyses based on the first and second law of thermodynamics is presented, as the missing link needed to fill the gap in understanding and designing energy flows in buildings. Guidebook to IEA ECBCS ANNEX 37 P 13 www.lowex.net  Energy quality is still not factored in our energy models. As a result, we continue to ignore the simplest way to enhance both energy efficiency and thermal comfort in our buildings. Designs that optimize the use of low quality energy also enhance the potential use of alternative and waste energy. Canadians were key participants in IEA ECBCS Annex 37. Canadian research firms are well placed to do the research required to reveal one of the best kept secrets of the 20th century.
Besides evaluating the mode of heat delivery (conduction, convection, radiation), Exergy is also a useful concept when evaluating the resources we draw on to provide building heating. Most houses in western Canada have natural gas furnaces. We wish to keep our homes at a comfortable 21 C, but natural gas can produce temperatures of almost 2000 C. Heating buildings can be accomplished with low-temperature sources of heat (solar thermal, geothermal, biomass, etc), whereas natural gas can be used to cut metal or send rockets into space. Natural gas has greater "availability" to do useful things than, for example, geothermal heat. It is better to match the energy source to the end use.
Currently we export almost all of our energy resources to one customer, the United States. The vast majority of Canada's pipelines lead to the central united states where we receive less for Canadian oil and natural gas than we would receive on the open market. In addition to that Canadians on the East Coast and in Quebec import foreign oil for their daily needs. We currently can't even get Canadian oil to other Canadians who instead rely on oil from countries like Iraq, Venezuela and Saudi Arabia. How is that sustainable if we look to the future of Canadian energy and what we want to leave the next generation with? And when we talk about the next generation we have to realize that currently the private sector is willing to invest tens of billions into new Canadian pipelines that will make our country stronger, rely on foreign oil producers less and reduce our reliance on only one energy customer - the United States. According to the IEA and virtually everyone who studies the energy industry the world needs more oil and gas in the future as more people lift themselves out of poverty and rely on more things that oil and gas makes possible - like cars, computers, plastic, health care, farming equipment, travel etc. This gives us two challenges. First the world will need more oil and gas, and it would be responsible to deliver more Canadian oil and gas to the world as Canada is simply a more environmentally and socially responsible place to develop oil and gas. If you don't agree, look up the countries with the ten largest oil reserves in the world and realize that this is a resource that according to virtually all experts we will continue to need more of in the future. However, with our current pipeline capacity we only deliver oil and gas to the United States. We hurt ourselves and others by making that possible, and currently the private sector is willing to invest 100% on expanding Canadian infrastructure to change this. The second challenge is that we can't even provide oil and gas to Canadians in a world that is going to need more and more oil and gas in the future. In the future this will hurt consumers in the East and make Canada reliant on foreign oil producers who, unless this changes in the future, don't value things like democracy, minority rights or the same level of environmental protection we expect here. Do we want the next generation to be reliant on countries like Saudi Arabia and Venezuala, or would we prefer that Canadians everywhere be able to receive Canadian oil and gas. And remember - the private sector is willing to make energy infrastructure like pipelines possible without cost to the taxpayers and they're willing to do it by Canadian standards which are some of the most environmentally sound in the world. So let's leave the next generation with a better energy picture than we have today. Exporting 90+% of our energy products only to the United States is not good today and will likely be worse years from now. Further, forcing eastern Canada to rely on foreign imports isn't good today and won't be good tomorrow. Make the next generation of Canadian business better tomorrow by allowing infrastructure to be built today.
This is very true, particularly the points regarding energy use in eastern Canada. Not only are we sending our money overseas to countries that do not consider the environment or minority rights to be a priority, we are also robbing ourselves of the royalties, tax revenues, and private-sector investment that would come with using Canadian oil instead of purchasing it from overseas. I appreciate the desire to stop pipelines from being built to protect the environent as well as to force Canadian oil & gas companies to "keep it in the ground", but the end result is counterproductive. More oil is shipped by rail (more dangerous and worse for the environment), and less clean Canadian natural gas is exportedto replace carbon-intensive coal plants around the world. Untilmost of us aredriving electric cars charged by renewable energy, it doesn't make sense to fight against buying our own gasoline.
I disagree. Canadian oil is amongst the most polluting form of oil. A new report ordered by Natural Resources and published today clearly says that Canada should prevent new infrastructure being built that would keep us tied to oil and other fossil fuels for many decades. Investments should be made in new technologies and renewable energy instead.
I disagree that we will leave the next generation with a better future if we expand our fossil fuel infrastructure. Globally, we must move away from fossil fuel use in the timely manner science dictates. If we do not, even if we benefit short-term, we will sufferin the long term and our children will have an anxiety-ridden and pretty hopeless future (extreme weather, global strife, elements of the natural world dying etc.). Transporting oil by rail or by pipeline both have risks associated with them. The solution is to reduce the amount of oil we transport until we reach the necessary emission targets in 2020, '50 etc. I've read recently that we must leave most of our oil reserves unexploited and that we have more then enough for our needs already. China and India are set to meet their climate targets and useelectric cars soon. We need to move forward and apply ourselvestomaintaining a healthyeconomy while at the same time preserving a habitable environment.
Spot on!
Are you still using fossil fuels? When will you stop?




Canada has made significant progress in adding renewable energy to our power generation mix and should continue to do so. However, in order to agressively pursue our climate commitments, we should also be taking a hard look at adding next-generation nuclear power to our grids. This type of generation is an excellent compliment to renewables because it is not intermittent and can provide baseload power to reduce the need for energy storage and excess generation capacity. Manytechnologies are available to provide safe, clean nuclear power at low cost and high reliability. New ideas like thorium LFTR reactors as well as proven systems such as secondary fission (used in France) and our own CANDU technology are ready to deploy today and just require the political buy-in and approvals. Nuclear power can help reduce the need for coal-fired electricity generation to improve our air quality,and can provide large amounts of power without the environmental impact of large hydroelectric dams or wind farms.
Canada is a partner in a global collaborative project to assess so-called forth generation nuclear technologies, including thorium LFTR reactors, which hold out great promise of enhanced safety, reduced waste, and improved resistance to proliferation - Generation IV International Forum.
I agree with the above comments on the need for more nuclear power. The path to a low carbon future must include an increase in nuclear power usage due to the factors Arthur mentioned. High capital costs for nuclear plant construction is a current barrier, but there is some great work being done to develop small modular nuclear reactors. These have the potential to significantly reduce capital costs. As we shift away from coal, a number of communities will be negatively impacted by the closure of coal fired power plants. Why not consider building nuclear plants in those affected communities? Workers displaced by closing coal plants could be retrained to work in nuclear plants. The NIMBY barrier for nuclear can be overcome by education on nuclear safety. Canada has a robust nuclear industry. We should be taking advantage of that. This is an area where the government can show real leadership.
I agree. I was fortunate enough to meet a nuclear physicist at a industry conference. He lived through WWII and the early days when they thought 'mini' nuclear would eventually drive your car and heat your house. In talking with him, I leaned that the breeder reactorwas the 'holy grail' of the nuclear industry. Extract 100x more energy and have 100x less waste, 2 orders of magnitude is very significant step change. Sadly innovationand development in the breeder reactors dried up when ample uranium was found.  We need to continue our collaboration with the Indian LFTR reactors and nuclear development.  Ideally we developa breeder technologythat can also consume our current waste stockpile, then modernize our fleet. Due to the energy density of nuclear, it is difficult to image a future without it, at least for quite a while.
The nuke industry has been promising "next gen" reactors for decades. Billions of dollars later, we're still decades away. Meanwhile, renewables are here now, and they're much cheaper. ON bought wind at 8 cents, solar 15 cents, and water power from QC is 5-6 cents. Prices for renewables keep dropping while prices for nukes keep rising. Let's get on with the renewables revolution.
Above ground pipelines occupy land surface area that is purchased and owned.  This surface area will now be further utilized by adding a solar array system, which harnesses the Suns energy and transfers it to an appropriate channel.  Solar train tunnels are an emerging solar technology, which perfectly illustrates how this aboved ground pipeline solar array system will look. https://twitter.com/jay_bee12345/status/777986231200129024 The solar array systems strutcture design can be based on Single column single design solar carports ideally to run along both sides of Above-Ground-Pipelines:http://premierconstructionnews.com/2011/10/28/belgian-solar-tunnel-is-an-international-milestone/http://www.carportstructures.com/solar-single-column-single http://www.vortexbladeless.com


If more of electricity in Western Canada was generated by natural gas, rather than by coal, more Canadians would be receptive to switching to an electric or plug-in hybrid car.
Agreed, but having coal-generated electricity is no excuse to keep an internal combution engined (ICE) car. Even with electricity generated by coal, an electric car is generating les greenhouse gases over its lifetime than an ICE car.I would argue that if more Canadians switched to an electric or plug-in hybrid car, then there would be even more incentive to switch our electricity production away from fossil fuels (including coal and natural gas) and towards renewables.Electric cars will become cleaner over time as the grid gets cleaner.
Consider producing some amount of energy for domestic consumption in the community it serves using renewables such as rooftop solar.
Publicly Published on Twitter on May 17, 2017. See Here:https://twitter.com/jay_bee12345/status/864851044831866880New: Spare/Extra @solarcity(Solar Roof) energy stored on @TeslaMotors Powerwall to power a neighbour's house for a rate lower than The Grid.This way adjacent houses save money on energy, while the solar home-owner earns income!Prompt housing adjacent to Solar & Tesla Powerwall installations for a "Neighbour Energy Plan Set-up" with approval of power source home.Thank you.Jaswinder Brar.See Again:https://twitter.com/jay_bee12345/status/864851044831866880
Gas companies need not be the victim of renewable energies but instead the leader of them. For decades man has aspired to build a perpetual motion machine, applying this concept to the gas industry just might not only lead to gas companies survival but their expansion. as wellTo explain. When fossil fuel are burned the carbon portion is converted to Carbon Dioxide (CO2) and released into the atmosphere. Today many companies, including giants such as GE, Shell, Chervon and NRG Energy are working of technologies that will not only capture CO2 at the source of it's production but are working on ways to pull CO2 directly out of the atmosphere. Which brings up back to perpetual motion. Before it's buy out by GE, Alstom Power was working with a small Canadian company Mantra Venture Group. Together they developed a process to covert CO2 to syn-gas using only renewable energy (Solar, Wind) and water. Syn-gas then could be converted to diesel fuel. providing an endless supply to gas companies, while at the same time creating a carbon neutral impact by the gas companies. Making gas companies a renewable green energy source.This mythological technology is far closer to reality than we think as Mantra Venture Group CEO revealed in a recent PR Feb 8, 2017.."Mantra is also awaiting the announcement of a recent Canadian funding opportunity for the construction of a pilot facility of its ERC-to-syngas technology at the Carbon Capture and Conversion Institute (CCCI) in Vancouver, for which it has submitted a full application. The grant would also cover equipment developed by a local partner for the upgrading of Mantra's synthetic gas product into diesel fuel, thereby showcasing the complete cycle of "recycling" CO2 back into a liquid fuel using only water and renewable electricity."  Diesel Fuel burning creating CO2, CO2 converted to Diesel FuelDiesel Fuel burning creating CO2, CO2 converted to Diesel FuelDiesel Fuel burning creating CO2, CO2 converted to Diesel Fuel http://cmcghg.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/12/20151127-CMC-Mantra-Presentation-Kazemi.pdf

Thank you, Minister Carr, for the opportunity to discuss the important areas of energy and climate change in Canada. I think it is important to have a price of GHG emissions, as has been proposed by the Trudeau government. Business is only able to make decisions based on dollars, so putting a price on emissions puts climate change mitigation into the language of the boardroom. And having a price signal lets consumers make different choices. But I think it has to be very transparent where the dollars collected through the levy actually go. If the money just goes into the governmental general revenue, then it will be seen as a callous tax-grab. But if the money flows back to citizens for projects that help reduce GHG emissions, then the tax will be doing its job. Also, there should be proof of GHG reductions in order to get a grant from the carbon tax pot of money.
An effective carbon price will be the catalyst for all the solutions. While fossil fuels are cheap they will be burned, and all the ideas on this website and other clean energy initiatives will be pushing on a string. I can't think of another industry, other than fossil fuel, that gets pampered with billions of dollars in subsidies and to add insult to injury dumps its garbage (CO2) into the commons at no cost to them, but a huge cost to the rest of us. The carbon prices proposed so far are inadequate. There should be long-term commitment for predictably rising prices until a 90% reduction below 2005 goal is reached. It should be revenue neutral and the Provinces should not be allowed to mess with that. Trade exposed industries should be selectively protected by Border Tax Adjustments instead of giving free permits to everyone and his dog. Fees paid by producers so the price permeates the whole economy, no exceptions, no output based BS, no banking, no off-sets. 


Geothermal power is accessible throughout Canada so long as you drill deep enough to access the heat. The renewable energy derived from the Earth could provide base-load power without GHG emissions. This is attractive from a climate change perspective, and once the geothermal power plant is in place the fuel is free. However the high upfront costs of drilling the wells and the cost of the power plant itself represent difficult barriers for traditional power companies to make the investment. However, First Nations may be able to accept a longer payback if the power plant provides social good for the community. Many First Nations are near large cities that could enter into power purchase agreements for the clean electricity,providing a stable income source for the First Nation community for decades. The power plant would provide opportunities for jobs, and these are jobs with skill sets that are in demand across Canada both on-reserve and off. Given the right proximity to customers, the waste heat from the geothermal power plant could be recovered and directed to a district heating network for an additional business opportunity.
There are so many reasons at this point in time, to support research, innovation and deployment of renewable/sustainable energy sources and they outweigh, by sheer importance and necessity, expanding fossil fuel infrastructure. Some of the reasons - wildlife, the arctic, our children's future, helping to mitigatethe disastrous effects of climate change globally, maximizing the economic benefits and minimizing economic risks as the world attempts to meet Paris Accord targets. We really only have a few years left to decline fossil fuel use in order toprevent disastrous climate change. I think we should move forward and help industry, citizens that need job transition and all Canadians meetour climate and emission reduction goals by shifting industry focus from fossil fuel to 100% renewables in the timely manner science dictates.
Invest in renewable energy and impose higher taxes on "dirty" energy producers
business centres, offices, etc are huge consumers of energy to keep the space cool or warm during peak times. Many businesses or schools could install automatic lights in order to turn off when not in use
make energy efficient modalities less expensive for the regular consumer, andgive more credits/grants for industry to develop energy-efficient delivery systems
Thank you for your idea! Did you know that there are many incentives for consumers and industry to become more energy efficient? You can find out about programs in your area here.
Thank you for your idea! Did you know that there are many incentives for consumers and industry to become more energy efficient? You can find out about programs in your area here.
sensored lights that turn off as soon as someone leaves a room and on as they enter to save every minute that energy is not being used
It is very useful to have a big thermos at home or in the office. You can fill it with hot water in the morning and use for tea or coffee without spending any energy.
Hydrogen powered cars are our future energy use for personal transportation. 
We should make use of solar energy even more with indoor solar lights and solar powered appliances in the future.
In Canada, we try to promote a healthier lifestyle by encouraging people to engage in physical activity. Gym membership has improved over the years. Potentially, if we could incorporate a cell/system that converts kinetic energy from the various gym equipment into electrical energy, this could provide a source of renewable and sustainable energy. Incentives such as discounted membership fees may attract more people to participate in this activity "Move to Improve" campaign. This will be beneficial in keeping energy affordable, meeting Canada's climate goals, and more importantly, building a healthier future generation of Canadians.
Allow people to use more solar energy in their homes in order to go off grid.
Near high-intensity uses like heavy industry or data centres it might be worth considering additional alternative energy sources to supplement grid generated power. On the one hand the industry partners could be encouraged to outlay capital to better guarantee continuopus power availability. On the other they could be rewarded for reducing their draw on the grid or even providing net power if the alternative energy facilities produce more than they need. This has a knock-on benefit of reducing transmission loss which is exacerbated by both distance or overtaxed equipment in transmission corridors.
Use Energy efficient appliances Turn lights, devices off when not in use Take public transit within your Municipality Car Pool when you have to drive Combine errands to make it a day long trip instead of multiple days
Provide tax cuts, monetary incentive or some other incentive to promote the purchase of enery efficient appliances, electric cars, solar panel roofing etc. Increase marketing for existing programs and support other business that are creating things like the carrot app.
In cities and communities where public transportation is inaccessible, not frequent enough, or is non-existent, there should be funding and incentives in place from the government to help foster a better public transportation system and culture. Making public transportation easier and more convenient to use would encourage more people to avail of the service and thus to positively affect our environmental footprint.
I rarely use my A/C. Instead I close my insulating blinds during the day and open the windows at night when the air is cooler. I keep the furnace fan on to distribute cool basement air to the rest of the house during the day.
By using energy save lights and more.
Tax incentives
Using LEDS and Solar power systems will save slots of energy. built more hydropower stations, thus we can make clean and eco friendly electricity. sell surplus to Us and Canada can make money.
Like many, I live in an apartment building that was built in the 70s. These buildings are so out of date they are incredibly wasteful in so many ways (old inefficient windows, toilets, washing machines and there is no composting allowed). Because I am a renter I can't really make any changes to any of these. I would love to see either incentives or bylaws encouraging/enforcing updates to be made to these buildings. 
I agree as a renter I have little control over appliances and insulation. I'd like to see incentives for landlords and property owners to update structures and appliances.
Go out more to save energy!
Every new home that is built in Canada must have enough solar panels on its roof to sustain its electrical use
Certainly it could be promoted nationally. San Francisco - https://sfgov.legistar.com/View.ashx?M=F&ID=4399794&GUID=FE220DFF-2C3F-4F0B-8C9B-39F1A61039F2 Miami - http://www.miamiherald.com/news/local/community/miami-dade/south-miami/article162307863.html California - https://us.sunpower.com/blog/2016/10/05/solar-helps-california-homebuilders-meet-2017-energy-regulations/
There should be more rebates towards fuel efficient vehicles and more charging stations.
offer rebates or subsidies for Canadian households to have audits of their housing to identify and quantify opportunities for energy efficiency
If Hydro or the Govt. would supply home owners with adevice to track where the most energy is usedor wasted, everyone would be able to identify theirproblem areas. Each home could have the loaneddevice for a month and then passon to a neighbor and log in with Hydro/ govt so the devices dont go missing. No login, no device report. Knowledge is power - we can work for changewhen we know where to start. 
Create laws that benefit the environment and enforce those laws. Those who don't comply must pay a fine that goes towards planting of trees or do environments community service.
Have a better way to track how people travel, and encourage it with discounts for certain mileage or rides used through public transit.
it would help to install more charging stations for motorists where they travel
Provide homes more information on how to reduce energy, through mail and email information
Every one has to switch off the lights and fan when the left from the room or work place every one has to creat more awareness towrds energy saving product and ideas so every one shoud informed by the idea
Everu budy has too make sure that all fans and light ate off all the time and be carefull for energy how to spend and wherr to spend
Well, If Everybody Just Pitched in, The same amount, Essentially there Would Be More Openings for employment, larger Families/Groups of Citizens Working on Growing their Business/Organization and Eventually Spreading From Local to Worldwide :P (Green Geographical Gemologist)
;)
Use Energy Efficient appliance. Switch off all computers if not using.
I use cold water to wash clothes and dishes. To ensure dishes are sanitized, just add a bottle cap of bleach to the dish water. Also, I wash all the dishes with a damp cloth and soap then give them all a quick rinse before letting them air dry.
I think there should be a master off switch located by the door when leaving a house. All in essential electronic items that are left on standby while homeowners are out, should be connected to this master off switch eg cable box, tvs, games consoles etc). When the homeowner leaves they should be able to switch them all off with the flick of a switch and turn them on again when they get home.
Great idea! Like hotel rooms.
Everyone knows that the largest consumers of energy are big industries that provide big services. While the idea of a carbon tax on the common person is noble and may help limit an individuals contribution to the greenhouse gas problem, it preys on people who may not already be able to afford electricity without the tax. These people certainly can't afford clean energy either. My suggesting is to shift the focus from carbon taxes on individuals to regulations on industries to carry out their business using clean energy, whether it be by hydroelectricity, wind power, solar panels, or other means that don't include fossil fuel use. A regulation for big industries could be put in place to require them to have say 10% of their energy used for production be clean energy by 2022 or so, with increasing requirements until carbon neutral or even carbon positive is achieved. I suggest that you make a regulation of this sort not incentive based, as that indicates it is voluntary, but required. Our environment is important and inidivduals cannot hope to fix the issues when they aren't the leading contributor. In addition, if you're looking for other ideas on how the government may want to improve their management of climate change, there are several European countries that have achieved carbon neutrality and you can look to them for direction and ideas for improvement.
More energy saving appliances in future
Millions of people across the country go to the gym everyday to ride a bike, running on a treadmill, or row on an ergometer. How cool would it be if instead of having to plug some of those machines in, the machines were used to generate electricity... like those crank radios that you have to crank to make power for them to work. 
I feel that more people need to become aware of this issue so that we can save more energy.
Hola
There should be more programs in place for low-income families to save. I'd love to have more energy efficient appliances, but as a mum in a family with a single income & renting, it's really not doable right now.
Equip more houses with solar capabilities and build more wind farms.
get office towers to use less air conditioning.
Move your fridge a bit further from the back wall and periodically clean the rear vents from dust and pet fur...
One way to assist in energy efficiency is by implementing Waste Heat to Power plants. These plants are able to use the wasted heat from geothermal, steel, petrolchemical, gas turbine - any big industial and commercial factories and use it to generate power and pump it back into the grid. Companies like KALiNA Power are doing this successfully globally. Amazing idea, very resouceful and helpful to the planet.
Thanks for your idea! Waste heat is certainly an area where Canada could use some more research. We have many guides available to help homes and businesses save energy. One of these is on how to recover wasted heat  you might find it worth a read. Thanks for sharing!
Expand bike lanes and improve public transit. 
There are so many avenues available to Canada to create new sustainable energy. First I think we need to focus many blubs of education through many different types of media. Helping everyday people understand & keep informed about what we can do now to help, & letting people know everything they "should know" about Energy in Canada today.Our youth should definitely be taking part in & learning everything that's important about "Energy in Canada" for today, next year & how it will affect their future. They will be our biggest innovators! I fear that adding taxes onto the already very strained lower to mid middle class will spir them on things like really wanting to contribute to the future of nrg in Canada. I guess that is part of why the rich stay rich and the rest sink further down each year. Perhaps finding a fair way to make sure it's the people using the most gas, & other nrg pay the most for that privilege... Send out questionnaires in each households nrg bill, by email etc Find out what people know & get an understanding of what people know, want, can afford, cause & effect etc. There are likely millions of ideas from some very forward thinking innovators in our beautiful country!
In an increasingly expensive housing market, polls reveal that many Canadians are shying away from purchasing over priced homes. Thus, let's create incentives forenergy efficient(e.e.) rentals that can benefitboth the landlords, who make the initial investment of purchasing E.E appliances, and the tenants, that actively look for rentals equipped with e.e. Appliances. Tax returns are one way that can truly incentivasse people.
Thanks for sharing your thoughts on energy efficiency measures that can benefit both landlords and renters. We have incentives and rebates in place for landlords to renovate or upgrade homes to be more energy efficient, which can be found here. We also have programs for renters here as well.
Turning off light sources when leaving a room.
Turn off the lights during the day and open the curtains to get natural FREE lighting!
i think we should get involve with one another and that we will speak only englisnesh thank you
Turn off the water while brushing your teeth. When waiting for the shower to warm up, collect the water in buckets to flush the toilet. When going swimming in open waters, don't wear sunscreen; wear full body suits instead.
All houses need to have solar tiles on roofs. The govt should help homeowners get set up with solar tiles and it should be a standard / compulsory for new homes.
If not already done, bring back the government program focusing on house upgrades for efficiency. However, don't make it a waste of time that I need a pre & post inspection. I receipt & pictures to prove the upgrade was done, yes, but the last time I participated in the program it wasn't worth it for the money I had to spend on the pre & post inspections compared to my rebate!
Hanging our clothes to dry outdoors in the fresh air rather than running a hydro powered clothes dryer is a great way to conserve energy & save money, however there are often private condo, rental unit or co-op rules or by-laws that prevent dwellers from using clotheslines on some properties because they are considered an "eyesore". This attitude must change so we can have the option to utilize this environmentally & economically friendly practice again as previous generations did.
Refining our own natural resources instead of of destroying the countryside would employ more people, save the waterways from oil spills and enrich our own economy. Why ship our raw materials to the U.S. at a minimum and buy them back at a premium?
Open windows instead of using air conditioning
Upgrade existing appliances to EneryStar rated equivalents.

create grants
add more solar panels
make cycling safer by installing my bike lanes on major roads and by enforcing safe driving rules for automobile drivers. It's sad when you see in the police in Sudbury cycling on the sidewalks while policing Even the police do not feel safe cycling on Sudbury streets
Find more efficient ways to use sunlight as energy, more solar power, reduce nuclear use, make roads safe for bicycles so more people will feel confident enough to ride their bikes than drive
Thanks for your comment! Canada is working on expanding its solar power capacity, and currently leads the world in solar air collector development and commercialization. You can learn more here.  Canada also has the first of its kind community located in Drake Landing, in which all the houses are heated by a system that uses the abundant solar energy received in that area. Check it out.
try doing laundry at night. This is off peak time and costs you less money and also use cold water.
To save on energy use from your blow dryer, towel dry your hair as much as possible. That way, when you blow dry your hair it'll be damp and not soaking wet and it will save you electricity and money!
Assist people in making significant changes to their homes - new windows, new heating and air on sources, new light fixtures, installation of solar power to enable people to make the changes and become more energy efficient
Thank you for your idea! Did you know that there are many incentives for consumers and industry to become more energy efficient? You can find out about programs in your area here.
large apartment buildings should provide energy efficient appliances at tenants request. Instead of recycling in decades old fridges and feeezers. This has a huge impact on costa and energy use. Especially when a fridge doesn't seal properly or a stove, and they're next to each other. This is putting a large burden on lowest income population.
Almost all electricity generation and distribution systems have distribution losses of 10 to 12 percent. If this percentage was reduced to five (5) there would be very large energy savings. Technology exists to increase efficiency of high voltage transmission lines as well as lower voltage distribution lines. This reduction of losses should be a priority and a condition required of all power companies before Utility Commissions approve requests for rate increases.
We should try to improve our recycling skills. For example, by putting food scraps and certain materials into the green (compost) bin, we can make our own soil. Another example, save your cans and bottles and bring them to a recycling depot to earn some extra cash. Remember, the different recycling bins are there for a reason!
If Norway is so much more energy efficient, we should be visiting and researching the methods they are using. Im sure we can learn many ideas from other countries and make them work for us.
This is a great idea. We should definitely follow the research and institutions of other countries whose systems inculcate the values we would like to promote in our society, and who have obvious similarities of geography, climate, etc.
Advanced technology and innovation in the oil sector . We have third largest reserves in the world and could apply advanced technology to ensure its safe and clean development and apply and sell that technology to other. Shutting down our oil patch will not stop our thirst for oil and other less desirable and less clean oil will simply be imported to fill the gap. So let's responsibility and cleanly harvest this important canadian natural resource. As well as development of wind, solar and tidal energy technology for Canada.
Common sense. That is what is needed. I have a forty dollar electric bill. Both my neighbors', over three hundred. Turn off outdoor lights that disturb wildlife and your neighbors. Turn off lights, tvs, computers and such when they are not needed. Short showers get you clean and you DONT need three or four per day. Teach your children to do the same and you will be amazed at the difference.
Consciously never leave a light on in any part of your home. When I leave a room or area I switch lights off!!!
This suggestion is a small one and probably would not create new or more jobs but would save you money in the long run. People are quite unfamiliar with the phantom power concept. Even if the device is off, as long as its plugged into the socket, it draws energy; that little light on your tv, video player or console is all it takes to draw even a tiny bit of electicity constantly. That bit can build up to, at first, a nonsignificant amount for a single individual a year, say 5 dollars on their bill for all phantom power appliences. When you multiply that by 1 million citizens, that number is now much higher and stands strong as an amount that can go towards making our environment and the future better. Think about it. Use a power bar for multiple electronics and flip that switch off at night before going to bed, it only takes a second.
Thanks for bringing this up. Its an interesting concept and more Canadians should know about this. Do others have ideas to share on ways to save energy in their homes? Keep the ideas coming!
Modern electronics like televisions, game consoles and such enter into a "standby" mode that continues to draw power and allows the device to access network functionality and such when in this state. Unplugging such electronics when not in use would save considerable energy usage over a long period.
Increase bike and pedestrian only streets and paths in an efficient way to reduce need to use motorized transportation.
Government to subsidize part of the cost of purchasing electric cars. Currently they are unaffordable for most Canadians. Carbon tax is pointless for encouraging people to be more energy efficient when other options aren't feasible.
Fresh water that is used by a household or apartment should be downcycled to be used for toilets
Thats a great suggestion! Waste water can also be used to heat fresh water in your home. You can learn more here. Please come back and let us know what you think.
Power Canada using green energy... like wind, solar, etc
In general, people want to recycle, but they don't know how or they don't understand the proper way to do it, so they simply give up and toss things in the garbage. When they do attempt to recycle, they throw things in the recycling bins that don't actually belong there, and this creates problems and for the recycling facility. If people were better educated on the proper ways to recycle (what goes in which bin, items that can and cannot be recycled), then we would have more items recycled, and less in the landfill. The most important part of this education is accessibility. Making this education ease to find and raising awareness that this info is available.
during peak sun hours, keep blinds open to help heat the house, rather than using a traditional heater.
saving water from your showers for other things like flushing the toilet
I think we should all just stop showering.
During a recent trip to Iceland, I was able to see how an entire country could survive with geothermalyheated water and geothermal electricity. Implementing this in Canada would create jobs in construction, generation, and so many more fields along with creating electricity in a more efficient and Eco-friendly manner.This method of generation is cleaner and does not produce the same emissions that other methods such as coal do; this would satisfy the climate goals set by reducing fossil fuel emissions, lead to an increase in jobs, and make energy more affordable for Canadians in the long run.
Thank you for your suggestion. Canada is working on many projects that support increased use of geothermal energy. One of the projects is to study the potential of deep geothermal energy for electricity production in Quebec and Atlantic Canada. Any other examples from around the world that Canada could look to for inspiration?  Let us know what you think!
The Canadian government needs to provide evidence-based information on electric cars not biased by the oil and car industry and other stakeholders in oil and commonly used vehicles. Also, if transit and buses are what is better and more efficient, then suitable mass transit must be provided.
We need a better transit system in windsor essex ontario. This would save energy. Building in the city core and out instead of surrounding city will save ppl from driving all over to get groceries, store, bank, kids activities, etc.
I believe Canada with its emense natural resource wealth, could take a Norwegian approach. Nationalize certain sectors and sub segments of industry. This will allow for profits to be reinvested in green technologies, while still paying good wages to Canadian employees. Norway's oil fun has made close to if not more than a trillion dollars. I also believe if we can work with the Native Peoples of Canada, to operate in their lands we can create lasting partnerships with good paying jobs in the north and help fund communities that need it badly.
To encourage using alternative transportation (and less 1car- 1 person) we should increase tax incentives for riding a bikes, car pooling and public transit and increase or add additional taxes on vehicle use. presently there is no incentive to use alternate means of transportation. Tax incentives will help "encourage"/make it worth people's time to at least consider not always using their car.
the natural resources of Canada should be owned and run by the people (the government). Countries like Costa Rica do this and it keeps energy and water costs super affordable. Extra energy can then be sold to other countries. Cash and tax incentives should be given to those who make and effort to minimize their usage.
Yes! Government does such a fine job of managing my hard earned tax dollars- let's give them a business to destroy as well.....
Honestly, anyone who thinks they're solving any problems on Toronto's roads by what they're doing is entirely mistaken.  There is RARELY anybody working when I pass a construction site on the roadways, and believe you me I have time to closely inspect the site for any sign of action due to the ridiculously slow speeds i am forced to trudge along at. I mean it gives me lots of opportunity to familiarize myself with my surroundings, and sites are constantly, consistently, NORMALLY absolutely deserted. It has occurred to me, passing these sites, that myself and my fellow road mates could even very well be a part of a social experiment, due to the pointlessness of the herding while nothing is being done and perfectly good road is literally right there... Also I think, "what a cash grab!!!"  I realize my digression however I feel it is necessary to accentuate my ultimate point.  I suggest that any work being proposed being done on the roads (or anything that may obstruct the roads) be approved by an environmental department due to the HOURS of extra drive time added to hapless commuters. I think the government could make a lot of money charging for the carbon tax that the construction causes added to the bid. You would need people to analyze how much extra carbon will be caused based on current traffic. This might also encourage the crews to be out of the way during "peak times" thereby reducing their ultimate tax and also will reduce the actual extra carbon being expelled by having cars on the roads longer than they ought to be.  On that same vein, I would propose the same for company trucks on the public roads. That should they choose to operate during peak hours, they be charged extra carbon taxes due to their clogging the roads with their inability to get up to speed and slow down fast enough to deal with traffic. I believe this will encourage them to operate outside of peak hours.  I can't say about the busses though as people need them so much, however I believe once drivers dont have so many other frustrating obstructions to deal with on the roadways, the busses will be able to find their harmony with the rest of the traffic.  Let us take a moment to regard the city's cab drivers, who are constantly obstructing the traffic. These city streets are paid for by taxes and do not belong to them, yet I'm constantly forced to maneuver around them stopped in no stopping zones for instance among other disregards for traffic rules. I believe as an organization who operates on our streets they should be a shining example of the rules or be penalized more than the average driver. I believe police could find much revenue by cracking down on the cab drivers driving infractions, especially considering they are constantly and unsafely using laptops and cellphones while they drive. Also, this will reduce carbon emissions by ensuring an obstruction free commute.  I think the implications of such a venture are actually quite exciting. To consider how many analysts, accountants and engineers (just to name a few professions) that would be required can only mean we will need to educate ourselves and our children to be able to efficiently tackle the issue at hand, and that can only make our population more effective at tackling even more pressing issues!!!  
WE NEED TO BUILD A SUSTAINABLE ECONOMY - socially, economically and environmentally. We need to protect the vulnerable. Those impacted by climate change, the effects of extraction, and the effects of decarbonization. 
Heat production in appliances uses more energy than using the same appliance with no heat.
iPhones chargers, laptop chargers, toaster, electric kettle, etc. Don't keep them plugged in when you're not using them to save energy and money. Turn your lights off when you're not in the room, buy better light bulbs, don't cheap out on quality when it comes to insulating your home, get the fridge magnet that shows you the peak and low hours of energy. I do laundry and shower after 7pm during the weekdays. Being methodical during bathing rituals or Doubling up in the shower with your partner can save money ? too.  When brushing your teeth, don't keep the water running and if you do, trickle the water. don't fill your entire sink with water if you're only washing a few dishes. If you have a sprinkler for your yard/garden, get sprinklers you can put on a timer. walk or bus more often when just going down the street.  
Allow homeowners to return any excess energy they generatefrom things like wind andsolar back to the grid. Begin a discussion with BC Hydro aimed at crediting homeowners for any energy supplements to the grid, or even a credit for using stored energy during peak hours.
Bring more affordable solar energy to Toronto
create more affordable housing that are energy efficient.
I think if we add how much we could have saved on our energy bills if we had used off peak hours instead, it may help motivate users to save that money. I think if you see the difference it could make in your wallet, it may help give people that incentive.
I don't know when the off peak hours are. When are Canadian Citizens told about it? Never learned it in school and never learned about it when I paid my first electric bill or bought my first place?
Make solar panels more accessible to Canadians. Subsidies, recommendations for types based on location of installation, recommended vendors. Canadians are willing to invest in sustainable energy, they just need guidance.
Transition towards solar, geothermal and wind energy controlled by communities and stop fossil fuel subsidies. Promote closer connected communities and political engagement. Learn from Indigenous ecological knowledge and give power back to Indigenous communities so they become self-determining.
our government must lead by example and show Canadians that energy and the environment are a big priority. Using public transit, especially in cities is really best.
Give a tax break/incentive to those who can prove be more efficient use of energy from the previous year (I.e. Lower consumption of electricity, gas, water). Not at all citizens are intrinsically motivated to be more responsible energy consumers. It's human nature to be motivated by extrinsic rewards. What better reward than money in one's pocket.

Yes! That should be applied especially to huge corporate because the amount of waste they produce is astounding but unfortunately they get away due to politics.
I live in Ottawa and ride my bike all year round, and I'd consider myself a fairly experienced cyclist. I also work in a bike store and meet lots of people who have thought about commuting by bike, or do so already. However, both from my own experiences and from what I hear from others, cycling is often dangerous and terrifying. This is partially due to lack of knowledge of the rules of the road on behalf of both the driver and the cyclists, and a mutual frustration between them. However, cycling to work or school can greatly reduce the number of cars in the road, and the environmental impacts of driving. Bikes don't use gas, the cause less damage to the roads, and they make us healthier at the same time! They're also often faster. However, many people are reluctant to commute by bike due to the dangers posed by drivers, especially during rush hour. Increasing the number of bike paths (and preferably well designed, and separated bike lanes from the road), as well as awareness and education for both cyclists and drivers about bike laws could all help make the roads feel safer and encourage more people to ride their bikes!
I agree. In my son's elementary school there is a course that is offered to the children that the parents pay for on bike safety, hand signals, road signs, getting off the bike when crossing the street. There was little advertising for parents to sign up their children for the "once a year course." Perhaps putting a bike safety course should be mandatory in the physical education classes and also when taking your motor vehicle written AND road test.    Ihave not ridden a bike in 20yrs and purchased my first bike this year. I had to youtube what the hand-signals were as I was one of the parents that did not have their child in the course. Like many other things we learn as a child, bike safety was forgotten. Now that I am starting to ride again, I am more aware of other bikers.    If the government educated bike safety through the school's curriculum, enforced it for the motor vehicle written and road tests AND add / more separate bike lanes, there would be more bikers on the roads and less conges
while showering, turn the water off to shave and even soap up. Use the water to rinse and get your body wet
Invest in a few laundry racks and hang that laundry!  In the hot weather it actually dries quicker outside than it does in the dryer, smells better and is reduces risk of fire!  In the cold weather, set up an area in the house to have racks and try to hang dry 2/3 of your weekly laundry. 
 Promote clean energy projects like solar and wind power projects. 
I think there are a lot of opportunities in work places to save energy. Shutting of lights when not in use, getting toilets that use less water etc. Create challenges for staff to complete to help save $ and energy around the office.
Great idea
what about a rebate on your hydro bill for people that use high energy appliances consistently at low peak hours. Even a small visible savings on your hydro bill will he noticed by consumers and be rewarding.
I agree the amount we get back will motivate the general public to save more energy.
Create more greenhouses and people farming. More people need to work for food. Have incentives to programs in technology.
Corporate giants should provide a pick and drop off service for its employees so instead of 200 cars traveling in the same direction to work at the same location on the same time with only a single driver , a specific single bus can pick up employees in the designated area from where employees can be dropped or picked up. Also if an employee chooses to carpool and bring along more fellow employees he/she could get an gas saving incentive. This will provide motivation and increase a company morale and punctuality. 
Greater access to charging network more parking spots in prime areas for cars with green license plates access to carpool lanes
Recycle/compost organics rather than use your garburator as much as possible, to reduce energy and water usage
I Would love to be energy efficient. I just bought my own house, but could not afford to get the efficient fridge, dryer, washer, stove. I was able to get coupons for efficient light bulbs. But everything is far to expensive for the typical civilian to own. Look at the electric cars. Who can afford that!
About 90% of the energy used by washing machines is used to heat the water. Wash in cold water to reduce the amount of electricity that you use.
wash clothes in cold waterto reduce the enrgy used by up to 90%!
if you use your washer and dryer at peak times you will save money then doing it anytime during the day. Also use cold water instead of hot water. Another thing make sure your laundry load is big enough so you don't do a small load.
At peak load, which is usually early mornings and late evenings, the energy is the most expensive. Using timer to set the washing machinefortimes when you are at work or when you sleep is probably the best option.
Every time I walk into a store, I'm overwhelmed by inordinate amounts of products that line the shelves, most made with plastic or in plastic containers. I think to myself, how much energy and resources are WASTED in the production of what is mostly junk that we don't need. Perhaps the only way to reduce this mass of junk and the energy it steals, and negative impacts on the environment, is to stop creating a demand for useless, unnecessary STUFF. I think we all need to seriously consider what we really need and decide to buy. Factories will only stop making junk and harming our environment if we stop buying it.
Along the same lines, we should try to choose quality (durability) over quantity: that way we would buy less over time. 
Also, if we had less stuff that we don't really use or need, we could live in smaller homes that would require less energy to heat and cool.
Must provide a tax break for those that use public transit. The metro pass tax credit was cancelled in Toronto and is a shame. Should also make public transit more accessible geographically as well as less expensive as in so many European cities.
Small scale solar, wind. Artistic wind turbines. Vertical gardens. Funding for small business.
renewable energy will help Canadians to create jobs. Off-grid electricity is easily affordable. Renewable energy methods will help to reduce the Greenhouse gas emissions
People need to be educated and need a reason to care. You can create many energy efficient tools but if people don't care to use them, there's no point. There needs to be more effective marketing used to incentivize the general public to be more environmentally friendly. Use social media to market the impact of being environmentally unfriendly and speak to what people care about, whether it be cost savings or something else (unfortunately people are self-centered so it will probably have to be something that affects them).
This includes small solar photovoltaic panels on each roof generating electricity during sunny days and summers. Along with lush green rooftop gardens that can be for aesthetic appeal and to clean the air in an industrialized area.
Make Canada more energy friendly have having a safer better system of bike paths in every major city.
While we should do everything we can to move our country toward small (micro) and large scale natural renewable energy, like solar, geothermal and vertical-axis wind energy, we should also be looking for ways to completely replace all fossil fuels ASAP. One way to do that would be with an alternative energy medium which could easily be implemented using current carbon energy infrastructure for fast deployment. There are research teams worldwide who are working on such problems and some who have solutions already, like nanoFlowcell. That group/research team has invented a flow cell technology and liquid electrolyte combination that could replace most modern energy generation systems like combustion engines and power stations in a safe, environmentally-friendly and non-toxic way. Their prototype car for example can drive 1,400km on a single tank of bi-ION liquid, which carries the energy needed for the flow cell to create low-voltage electricity to move the car. This technology can be scaled up to public transport and more importantly to power generation stations, which would mean cutting the carbon problem at the source if we could replace all our electricity generation needs to this system. Another positive point is that the ionic liquid can be produced locally in an environmentally compatible way and is not hazardous to health, thus creating or replacing obsolete (carbon) jobs in the energy sector. Now, this is just information I have come across in my personal research into alternative energies as an individual and I am in no way associated with nanoFlowcell or any parent company or individuals associated with it. (Learn about their technology for yourselves on their website) I just think it is a great applicable concept that could be a game changer for Canada's energy needs. It is also an opportunity to introduce cheaper energy to Canadians, because this liquid would be much less expensive to produce than fossil fuels, especially the dirty tar sands. It would also be important that the savings from such energy generation be passed down to Canadians and be kept out of the hands of corporations so that the introduction of such alternative energy could be used as a one-two punch to alleviate environmental AND economic stress for everyone. I believe this idea should be seriously explored by NRCan, does anyone else think similarly? Visit the nanoFlowcell website to learn all about their technology.
Using transit daily for work, making a group of people for transit and discussing one interesting topic each day regarding current affairs. This keeps people being interested to travel in group and increases general knowledge as well.
Protect those scientists who are creating free energy devices from being assassinated by deep state who want us dependant on oil.
Stop building hydro electric dams that poison people, wildlife and environments. That threaten to kill off cultural practices. Flood and drown whole communities and traditional indigenous burial grounds. Methyl mercury poisoning. Significant contributor to climate change. Muskrat falls doesn't contribute to this goal of climate goals and affordable energy. It only contributes to job creation, which has proven to be more important in Canada than the other topics.  Create sustainable energy. Create meaningful work. Support communities and cultures. Wind power, solar power.
Wind power and solar power are not better than hydro for GHG and as they produce intermittant power, they need hydro to produce when they don't.
Methinks this person has an axe to grind......
Often energy saving appliances, furnaces, etc are priced too high to be affordable. Secondly we need to improve bike lanes and transit systems to encourage biking and mass transit.
Alternative energy must be explored. A stepped system to put energy back into the grid from private sources without penalty. Focus on environmentally friendly energy production such as solar, wind, geothermal and physical generation. Allow for source generation by private and community concerns without penalty and shared knowledge groups. Allow for access to proven technologies using government approval apparatus e.g. Energy star
Make solar panels affordable and accessible. Create a program for home ownersto receive a tax credit if they install and use solar panels on their home. Help places like churches/mosques (non-profit organizations) to offset costs for installation of solar panels on their facilities.
This is needed. SaskPower in Saskatchewan offers only a 20% rebate off an install on a meter. This could be supplemented with a federal rebate too.
The suggestions in the report are quite excellent. It is important to include costs to the environment in the calculated cost of the energy. To ensure that happening, there must be the MOST effective way of achieving that in place. Our indigenous peoples must be paid fairly for the use of any of their resources, and they must be consulted and listened to. "Our" Mark Carney predicts global economy will indigenous crash if we don't move quickly away from oil sources. Developing the technology NOW will ensure we can sell the technologies to other countries, thus creating jobs for Canadians. What are we waiting for? More flooding? More food production lost? Even higher temperatures? More weather trauma? More spills, "accidents" from oil? Many more immigrants, because of land, food loss? More crisis? A disaterious future for our children? Panic at home, and around the world? The top 1% of the richest people will always survive best. Time to look out for oridinary citizens. 
New homes should include water storage plants which can store rain water or snow which can be used to water the garden and lawn. secondly, solar panel lights should be promoted fixed for out door lights when building new homes.
When consumers buy appliances, Canadian government and its partners should offer an immediate rebate or discount on the energy efficient products to help Canadians choose more energy efficient products. Even small discounts should help make a smarter choice. Long term positive effects such as savings in the energy bills are enticing as well but an immediate positive reinforcement would help with immediate decision making.
I would like to see the government change the building code to make all new build shave some form of renewable energy source such as solar panels, solar tiles, or other options. Also it would be nice for those responsible home owners who actually feed the grid with power to not be taxed or get financial rebates. A lot of people wish to be more environmentally responsible but we still have to support our families in a tough economy so financial incentives from the government or lesser taxes would encourage Canadians to become world leaders in the race to save our planet from climate change. Please help us help our planet.
Thanks for your suggestions. Weve got some good news for you! Canada has a number of programs to help homeowners who would like to become more environmentally responsible. You can find a list here. Please feel free to review the programs, then come back and let us know if you see any gaps or have more ideas.  We also have programs that provide information and training to anyone who is constructing new buildings. You can find more information here.
Work in concertwith manufacturers and power companies to make readily available affordable solutions corresponding to the specific needs and particularities of the various Canadian markets: low population density; vast distances; aged and under developed infrastructure; climate impact; reduced efficiency of harvesting solar radiation due to lattitude; actualmix of ineffecient-to-harmfultechnologies and equipmentcurrently in play (both actively on the market and in widespread legacy positions throughout public, private, and commercial installations) and in need of tailored solutions(ie: majority position in Canadian buildings of inefficient heating solutionssuch as line voltage base board radiant heating, coal oil or natural gas furnacesand a lack of mandated renovations of aged structures which were eitherbuilt without eco-considerations considerations, ordue to their age and condition are increasingly inefficient: measure ought to be put into place updating building codes to desired efficiency standards, obliging existing structures meet those same standards, and providing the necessary support to enable such. Additionally above mentioned heating methods should be obsoleted wherepossible in favor of more technologies more efficient in terms ofgeneration, distribution and management of heat - ideally ones with a neutral ecological footprint, harness ambient natural processes in a non destructive mannegeneration harnessing geothermal energy and the natural aquifer in a combination of open and sealedcircuits for heating cooling and power generation; dramatically expandingphotovoltaiccells usage to a multitude of novelor compounded applications, like low efficiency photovoltaictransparentcoatings (which currently exist) being used on various surfaces, for example windows,and generating sufficient electricity to activate impregnated electrically sensitive dyes within their matrix, automatically darkening or clarifying during peak sunlight hours and reversing in the absence of sunlight,thereby increasing thermal efficiency of the building they are part of, increasing their own capacity for photovoltaic production which can in turn be harnessed to other purpose, and automatically without additional energy consumption requirements adjusting natural lighting levels in the building; photovoltaic cells with deliberate inefficiency used to maintain roofing or pathways free of snow or ice as they shed unharnessed light back into the environment as heat, further, harnessing and focusing that heat for thermostatic purposes and to generate or amplifyconvectiveair currents that in turn can be harnessed for distributing said heat... while alsoturning many pinwheel sized windmill dynamos in a distributed network model of a microwindfarm.various other natural forcesand processes in our environsmaybesimilarly capitalized uponeither through their native interactions or inherent progress, in ways which offer similarminimally-consumptive or otherwise ecologically disruptivemeans by which to harness or channelthe ambient transfers of energieskinetic, potential (gravity, chemical), or thermal that these forces and processes represent. Eg. biomatter releasingheat as a normal waste product of decomposition. A process which would occur regardless in the absence of interference by humans, can be focused, channeled and optimized into a tool with compound benefits: heat/energy generation; harnessing the process of recycling of food (and other) waste, into various productive substances, while cultivating microorganisms which can serve multitudinous purposes, further synthesizing bio-refined hydrocarbonsand other complex organic chemical substances as additional waste products, etc etc. and just by channeling aambient transfer kineticthermal or potential potentof which are to which can serve aseve of generating involving transparent cells in windows expanded to natural harnessingnaturaland engage withmultiple levels ofmultiple broad base of that are at minimum geothermal, solar, and othersuch efficient and ecologically neutral to existing buildings requiring structuresof  ingredients to such as which must either have tailored efficiency upgrade measures developed, manufactured and installed and ; etc. available as well asheavily encourage citizens (both private, and public) to invest in and adopt especially eco-centric energy efficiency measures both as behavioral effect eco-centrenergy saving tax incentives
 Government has to encourage talent like making crafts,handloom products etc at home itself 
Thanks!
Canada is blessed with an abundance of options for renewable green energy options! We have more lakes and rivers than the rest of the world, combined! These should be harnessed to generate Hydroelectricity, everywhere. We have vast tracts of undeveloped land on which to erect huge wind farms and solar farms. Hundreds and thousands of acres large. The Canadian government should immmediately declare its commitment to green energy. Think: Kennedy's commitment to go to the moon in 7 years. He set a goal, set a timeline, set a deadline, freed up resources and dared the country to be a leader in space exploration and the nation stepped up. Canada should do something similar with green energy. Sure, big oil will scream that their livelihood is being threatened. Too bad. Sure, fringe groups will yell that wind farms are noisy and might kill a few birds. So what? All this will take is the political will to look beyond the screams to a future where all the energy needs of Canadians will be covered just as health care is covered. Think about that future for a minute!
most people are very conscious about energy consumption at home because it comes out of their own pocket. What I think government should focus on is businesses with more than 10 people . If there is a way to track energy/person use at work, and make it into a competition. We might be able to cut down on energy consumed by companies and I assume that is a lot. 
Thanks for your suggestions to make corporations reduce their energy consumption. Canada also provides incentives for corporations to become more energy efficient in our directory here. Let us know what you think!
Many corporations in their charters, are driven by the bottom line, make as much money as possible for investors. What we need is aggressive promotion of the alternative B Corporation type status; this provides legal protection for corporate officers who pursue social value such as renewable energy usage as well as monetary value in their operations -- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Benefit_corporation
It is great to see houses with solar panels, but I'd like to find solar panels that can be used by people in apartments. They could be used to charge mobile devices and the like.
Solar panels are ok for charging cell phones in apartments, but no where powerful to ptovide the many kilowatts that a house needs.
Some apartment buildings have enough roof space to meet the entire electricity needs of a portion of the occupants. They're no where near as ineffective as Mike M.'s comment claims.I've a north-facing window only in my apartment condo, so the only option is to have them installed on the roof to be a shared benefit to all residents.
Construction on roads take place during the summer because of Canada's climate, but road construction should also take place during the night. Decreasing traffic congestion during the day will lead to less CO2 emissions from cars. Construction workers can work during summer nights, more efficiently because they won't have to work under the hot Sun. Night-Road Construction will produce happier workers, less traffic and less car pollution.
I think you would find that working at night is less productive and would cost more in Accidents, and other problems for the workers. But would be more convenient for drivers.  On idea would be for construction areas, to have Cars turn of their Engines by telling the , the TIME till their lane moves.
Our education system from K-12 needs to better equip our students to tackle these problems. We should be learning about food sustainability and vertical farming (growing vegetables and raising chickens at home as projects). Micro-agriculture should be required learning in school. Kids should be learning about energy, electricity, solar and wind generation and how to build and install these systems right from the get-go. There should be Technologist's at every school. There's no reason these things cannot be taught with the presence of adults that are technically proficient.
Landon, agreed: education is an integral pieceof any transition. I would love to see more energy professionals, with various backgrounds, visiting schools.How can we make it happen?
Having someone access a house, and switch everything to LEDs, motion sensors, and even swap out old fans for more energy efficient ones! I did my house and I save 20 dollars a month on my power bill!  
Smart thermostats typically reduce yearly energy consumption by 20%. Homes with high voltage (120V or 240V) electric heating can use Mysa Smart Thermostats. Homes with low voltage (24V) heating can use ecobee, Nest, or Honeywell Lyric. The government or utilities should offer homeowners rebates or strong tax incentive for upgrading their home energy efficiency.
Agreed.
The transition to a low carbon economy has begun across Canada. This discussion must include evidence based on the matching of our current consumption, available technology and the size of the goal. This discussion paper outlines the challenges ahead
This presentation made public in April outlines the economic challenges and the amount of investment required to meet the Paris Accord targets of 80% less (1990 levels) GHG emissions by 2050. The report was presented to the Conference Board's Reshaping Energy Conference which took place April 11-12 in Ottawa. The modelling was based on the Trottier Energy Futures report which outlined technical pathways to GHG reduction conducted by the Canadian Academy of Engineers. 
Canada has one disadvantage over most developed countries when it comes to reduction of GHG Emissions, we are big. Road transportation is a key sector to keep our economy moving and a major challenge in reduction of GHG emissions. Read our report on how we get there.
Link here:Mobilizing for Canadas energy future: The devil is in the details
Aside from changes in use, many significant energy efficient products and services are easily and readily available but are prohibitive in cost. As such, people don't buy as many and therefore the cost doesn't come down to a reasonable level. If the cost doesn't come down, change will be slow. People will do their part to save energy to a point but not at all costs. Provide tax breaks on energy efficient products to manufactures and consumers. This will fuel the market. Tax bad effiency products as is tried now with alcohol and cigarettes. The market will change. As the market changes, so will awareness and energy savings. Rebates also work. I changed out all my thermostats because of a rebate. Rebates on insulation (without all the hoops) is a no-brainer.
I think that offerin a rebate to consumers who purchase Energy Star appliances would encourage more people to get energy efficient appliances for their home.
Hi. You can find a list of Energy Star rebates and incentives in the directory here. Hope this helps!
While I support rebates and other efforts to reduce the costs of environmentally friendly technologies, another point I'd like to make is that it also requires the support of local authorities. Our home is on a hill, and we generally have at least a bit of wind. However, when we were looking at putting in a small personal wind turbine to generate electricity, we checked with our bylaw office first. We were then told that since we were the first in our community to look at doing this in a residential area, we would first have to pay >$5,000 so the city could do engineering studies before even reaching the point of being able to apply for permission, with no guarantee we'd receive it. This, even though we were told that industrial properties in our area were already using the same type of equipment on a larger scale. Needless to say, with that type of attitude, the project was a non-starter. Without support from local authorities, all the alternative options are useless.
You are advocating for higher taxes, NO THANKS
Make all electric cars free and get rid of all the gas guzzlers! That way we can get electric cars in and gas out.  also, make cars that run in water! - Jack, age 11 Also, increase number of outlets for recharging. I jus bought a new car (gas) and would have bought electric if I had a way to charge it!  
Actually I had the same idea just a little refined...I am a3rd yearenvironmental science student and just completed a first year economics course which is where I was when I came up with this idea. So here it is...the TOP TEN REASONSwe should give every Canadian 1 or possiblyeven every post secondary student graduating 1 electric car, you would 1. Promote energy efficient transportation; 2. Dramatically increase the number of electric cars sold; 3. Um...Jobs!!!; 4. Boost the economy (off shoot because extra income not spent on a car); 5. Promote education (if given to students only); 6. Steele industry (and others related to car manufacturing); 7. Decrease the price of electric cars to make them more accessible to those not eligible (could offer tax rebates/incentives also); 8. Decrease unemployment (people able to get to work); 9. Wind energy generators EVERYWHERE! (think about the beauty of that one for a second); 10.Be a world leader, innovator (Paris Accord...check!).
Thanks for your ideas! We hope to all work towards that. We have some good news for you. Canada is investing in building over 200 new charging stations across the country, especially in high traffic areas.  Thanks for contributing!
The government should lead by example to reduce the amount of energy we use in transportation. From poice cars to mail vans, if the government starts using these vehicles not only will the general public will follow but it will encourage car makers to invest more in the industry. This will have a compounding effect, growing the infustucture, and reducing costs making owning an electric car more economical than the alternative.
We need an ongoing infrastructure improvement for providing public transportation options between all the satellite cities and Vancouver. The commuters who are driving to jobs and school in Vancouver are not encouraged to use public transport as the time availability and regions covered are inadequate. This is an election promise that I think should be acted on immediately.  thank-you, Claire Archibald
Rebates for installing wind and solar power and allowing more power generated into the grid
To elaborate, maybe let's focusing on convertingthe dirtiest and most expensive sources of power to renewables. Did you know that over 200 communities in Canada depend on diesel fuel for grid power? I recommend Tesla solar power plants. With you support we can make it happen :)
Hi. You can find rebates for installing solar power here. There is also a municipal fund in place to help municipal governments become more energy efficient through green power (including wind) here.
Don't allow municipalities to restrict tiny home sizes.small footprints are good for the environment. Many people want to live in smaller houses to avoid debt and unnecessary energy consumption. Composting toilet technology needs to be approved too. energy rebates for reduced consumption in occupied dwellings. Make it easier, not harder for us to simplify our lifestyles.
Love this idea! Tiny homes are not only a way to reduce theenergy consumptionof the home itself, but are also a way to encourage a general reduction in consumption of goods and services and to encouragea minimalist mentalityin a variety of areas. I would love to see a tax credit for renovation...that downsizes!
Every City Council should be finding ways to make this work.
 Mantra Energy Alternatives Ltd. 'technology has been sitting on a lab bench since 2014 waiting for funding from the Canadian government, to move the technology from the lab to commercialization. At one time (2014), Canada was inline to be the first country to build a pilot plant to convert CO2 to saleable chemicals at the Lafarge Cement Plant in Richmond BC. Today, do to non action by the Canadian government, economic and environmental advantages are being lost by Canadians to other countries. From Zurich "This Machine Just Started Sucking CO2 Our Of The Air To Save Us From Climate Change" https://www.fastcompany.com/40421871/this-machine-just-started-sucking-co2-out-of-the-air-to-save-us-from-climate-change "Mantras ERC technology employs an electrochemical reactor to convert carbon dioxide, the most notorious greenhouse gas, into valuable products. By doing so, large stationary emitters, such as cement or power plants, can profitably reduce CO2 emissions by generating a valuable, salable chemical. Chemicals that can be produced from CO2 using ERC include formic acid and its salts, carbon monoxide (used to make syn-gas which in turned is used to make diesel fuel)" Mantra Energy' technology is market ready.Per MVTG 10Q Converting C02 to "formate salts have been obtained on tin cathodes with current efficiencies above 80%, at industrially relevant conditions. Current efficiencies exceeding 80% have also been obtained on proprietary silver cathodes for carbon monoxide, the key constituent of syngas." Potential economic opportunities from CO2 converted products being missed by Canadian citizens, per MVTG 10Q. Syngas :"the ERC process to syngas suffers from very few market limitations. The market for synthetic gas is currently estimated at around $36 billion, and growing. Due to the large number of products which can be produced from syngas, including gasoline, diesel, jet fuel or methanol, we anticipate the demand for an environmentally-conscious pathway to these chemicals will grow rapidly into the future". Formates:"These products have existing markets as commodity chemicals and sell for between $1,000 and $1,500 per tonne, with global consumption being in excess of 600,000 tonnes per year. Formic acid and its salts are used in a variety of industrial applications, including silage preservation, leather tanning, textiles production, oil well drilling, and de-icing, and show enormous potential for market expansion through their use in chemical energy storage" As more efficient cathodes are being developed for other saleable chemicals (example methanol), economic rewards to Canadians will only increase. Environmentally, by MEA technology remaining in the lab, Canadian businesses that produce wasteful CO2 are missing the opportunity to neutralizing their Carbon imprint.. So Canada I leave you with this question. Is it worth a 3 to 5 million investment to bring in 10's of billions of dollars of economic wealth to Canada, while at the same time making Canadian companies carbon neutral? Canada is a leader not a follower. Canadians have already lost 3 years let's not lose anymore. 
If it's such a good idea, where are the entrapreneurs/investors to get the project started.....
I would like to take this opportunity to make an interesting proposal, on behalf of current concerned Canadians about climate change. With a small investment, we can send a symbolic gesture to our nation, and the world, that climate change is real, and that we can influence this change either negatively or positively with our carbon-based energy choices. I suggest, because its 2017, our 150 birthday, that we convert our wonderful 1967 Centennial flame, in front of Canadas parliament, to be powered with green energy sourced hydrogen gas, instead of the current hydro-carbon based natural gas system. This would go along way to communicate to all those concerned that we are all serious about transitioning our economy to clean energy production, storage and transport. Hydrogen based technologies currently exist to power the flame safely and sustainably. Green sources of energy can produce the needed hydrogen for combustion as well as many other applications via hydrogen fuel cells. Many economies, Sweden for example, are committing aggressively to this green economy transition. I think, and I suspect many others will welcome this opportunity to help create a symbol of change in front of our House of Commons representing all Canadians. Everyone can agree that we want a clean and sustainable energy future. This is one small, easily achievable gesture with many long-term benefits;  Signals our government policies affirm anthropogenic induced climate change is real Supports innovation for transitioning to a green economy Powerful clean energy solutions are available We can provide global leadership in climate change  Please take the time to consult the scientific and technical expertise to make this happen. I would be happy to discuss this further, to move this forward. Please take this opportunity for all of us, for those that are being affected by climate change right now, and importantly for those who will be feeling the more severe impacts in our future generations.
Rebates for upgrading to energy efficient appliances
Hi. You can find rebates for energy efficient appliances based on your location here. Hope this helps!
I work in a business tower downtown core of Vancouver for the federal government. 3 yrs ago we had a huge refit where almost 500 people occupy 2 floors. The lighting which was installed is so bright, almost everyone has had one of 3 flourscent tubes removed from the fixture over their desk - it's still too bright. That's all we're allowed to do to the lighting fixture. 2 must remain. This is a huge waste of electricity.
Create train between cities ie. From Edmonton to Calgary rather than using cars.
We have riden on the test FAST train near Beijing and it was wonderful - let's build the Hyperloop between Calgary & Edmonton with ideas to expand east and west.
My understanding is that an Edmonton-Calgary train wouldn'treally have the ridership levels to validate the expense. I assume the hyperloop is similar. Looks like Toronto-Montreal is a good candidate for the hyperloop though! https://www.thestar.com/news/canada/2017/09/15/toronto-montreal-corridor-a-strong-candidate-for-hyperloop-travel-judges-say.html 
It's discouraging to use the compost or organics waste box when our trash bins are larger than our organic bins. Could we have larger receptacles for organics that are widely available?
Everyone should be encouraged to have their own garden and comport heap. Keep the compost bins the same size and use them for the nasty weeks and branches you don't want in your 'gourmet compost'.
I am currently in the solar industry here in Ontario and have developed projects around the world. Ontario finds itself with an abundance of power due to contracts with wind/solar and gas plant operators. That excess power sometimes close to 2GW's is often dumbed into the US markets. Li-ion grid storage batteries would completely transform the Ontario power market and allow firm power to be sold at a much higher rate to neighbouring jurisdictions. Problem grid storage is hard for private companies to find funding, due to the hard to model revenue model associated with storage. If the Canadian federal government purchased the storage, it can easily be sited on Canadian military bases across the province and even country. It would provide the bases with back-up power in case of emergency. The USA deploys billions of dollars worth of renewable energy across their military bases around the world. Allowing Canada to include these under our defence budget and help us meet our NATO spending commitments. This idea has the potential to dramatically reduce power costs across the province and deploy more wind and solar. And make Ontario more competitive. Batteries instead of bombs. Feel free to reach me at my email address. 
This could change everything.
Thats an interesting suggestion: using grid storage to maintain our military bases. If youre interested in learning about other projects using Li-ion grid storage batteries, Natural Resources Canada has funded a few to learn about their use in:   Wind energy storage in the north; Their use in a smart microgrid environment; and Utility scale energy storage.  Thanks for your contribution.
Right now only 5% of people/companies/schools paying electricity bills can go solar do to having to possess a "good solar roof". Leaving out 95% of rate payers. Putting a 7kW system on someones home costs about $24k. Locating those same panels in a field as part of a large project is close to $12k. And in the field they will produce 30% more power per year. So a home owner only needs a 5kW system, which reduces their costs even further to the $9k range. Everybody should have the right use the grid and self procure their own green energy, and reduce their carbon footprint. EV owners should be able to offset their electric car needs. 19 US States have launched Virtual Net Metering programs. In MA a consumer can buy green energy cheaper than brown. This model allows companies and consumersto easily subscribe to a local solar or wind project and offset their bills. Locking in at a flat rate for 25 years. BSW
Brilliant idea!
Brilliant! Let's do it and reward people who feed into the grid.
I think tenants, especially of high rises use way too much water and electricity because it is included in the rent. If a way could be done to moniter usage then give the tenant a rebate once a year as an incentive if they drop their usage. I am on a well so we take 5 min. Showerx but my kids friends in the city think nothong of an hour long showet!
Great idea!
small Ac generator using neodymium magnet sphere - ac generator head, dc motor, coil without core and battery. - battery - solar panels http://sciencetoolbar.com  
If this could be up-scaled it would certainly be very valuable.
Do you know about the Genergy - brilliant! Try it!
Just apply higher rates according to a table and different ranges of use, the more you use the more you pay, the less you use up to a certain limit you get rebates, promote incentives to move from ea higher range to a lower one
Absolutely! Money talks!
We need an agency that advocates, conducts R&D, into markets and renewable energy like the NREL in the USA. It needs to have the mandate of reducing costs, increasing adoption of renewable energy across the country. Educating consumers, government and business alike. Turning wind, solar and storage into strategic energy sources like China. 
YES YES and YES
I live in the province of Newfoundland & Labrador. A province of Oil profit and Oil jobs, the political parties are noticable biased toward Oil profit, Nalcor, Hydro and other big business in province. Our energy costs are high and getting higher by the day. The way government has choose to run the electrical utilities is extremely incompetent. The contracts run amok with huge salaries, continuances, severances and such with very little review or supervision. What is worst is until very recently they squashed all independent development and interest in renewable personal energy sources such as Windmills and Solar. We can't feed excessive energy to the grid as some provinces can and considering we had blackouts in our coldest months and warnings against power usage at peak season and a general strain on an old faltering system through Newfoundland Power and Newfoundland Hydro who share a Monopoly divided by region. There is no other choice but to use this inefficient, failing, expensive and non environment friendly source of Energy. There are many rebates for home heating insulation, power cost cutting measures, but very little to promote renewable clean energies. Nor will the province seem to investigate more reasonable money saving and cost cutting green energy now that it's contracted muskrat falls The gross misuse of government funding and oversight through political biased and manipulation is highly affecting not only the common person and their bill but also visably destroying our environment. We need to put into action windmill operations in our windiest province and encourage personal renewable energies through pay back credit on the grid and tax benefits and encouragement for entrepreneurs and business to bring in renewable energy projects, and materials. And especially offer the course of study at once of the provinces secondary education facilities. We can change where we make our money and improve the environment while creating jobs and more educated individuals. The skills can be changed over. The courses and diplomas can be created. The purpose of government is to unite all a land in common goal, promote once unified message and enforce it. And in the past several decades it's become more of a power balance then a promotion of personal welfare, enconomy and growth.
Calgary/Alberta has developed an organization called Iron and Earth - they retrain oilsands workers to work in renewal energy - brilliant idea! We need renewals online now so that over the next 30 - 40 years we can phase out oil and gas.
Thank you for your contribution to the discussion. The affordability and reliability of energy supply is, and will continue to be, of great concern for Canadians (especially given our extreme weather conditions across the country!). There are indeed tremendous opportunities to deploy wind and other distributed generation technologies across the nation. For instance, as coal generation continues to be phased out (in Alberta particularly), it will hopefully be replaced by renewables. However, government action, as you point out, is required to incentivize renewables and to put a price tag on the pollution emitted during the combustion of fossil fuels. Thats why, in December 2016, the federal, provincial, and territorial governments, working with Indigenous partners, adopted the Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change.
To put the framework into action, Budget 2017 provided funding for new initiatives, including several that will support renewable energy projects, such as:  $9.2 billion for provincial and territorial priority green infrastructure projects $2 billion for a Low Carbon Economy Fund to support provincial and territorial projects that reduce greenhouse gas emissions $200 million to support the deployment of emerging renewable energy technologies, such as off-shore wind $100 million to support next generation smart grid, storage and clean electricity technology demonstration projects   Actions on climate change and clean growth will improve Canadians quality of life and will be major steps towards building a prosperous, lower carbon future for our children and grandchildren. Thanks again for your comments.
Have more earth days where people are encouraged to use less electricity. Maybe have a rallying of the wards to do this. Better recycling initiatives also.
Good idea - bring the ideas home from school with the kids for parents and grandparents. Ask children to report back at school about how many people they convinced to participate.
I always turn on all the lights in my house for earth hour because it gets so dark on my street. I don't like it when my kids come home brainwashed with the idea that windmills will save the planet. 
As a renter, the amount of things under my control (light bulbs, electricity use timing) are limited and pale in comparison to the difference more efficient windows, insulation and large appliances would make.
As a landlord I support this because there is no big incentive to change the status quo of my property. I understand the benefit of reduced hydro usage and heating requirements, but the immediate cost/investment tends to outweigh the slow long term gains.
That is true. However, there are some incentives available for landlords to renovate or upgrade homes to be more energy efficient, which can be found here. You can also see what programs might apply to you here.
Penalize the landlord for NOT doing it - then they'll be incentivized. All stick; no carrot!
At the end of the day, landlords just want to make sure their properties are being rented. With time, renterswill care more and more about the environmental performance of the spaces they occupy. As such, there will be more demand for energy and water efficient buildings. Landlords will be able to charge a premium for their high performance buildings. That's the incentive. Forward thinking companies and organizations want efficient buildings because they know it reduces operational costs and it gives them social brownie points :) LEED and other building energy efficiency certifications exist so that the renters know what they are getting. It's worth remembering that the biggest variable that impacts a building's energy and water consumption is the user.
Thorium is considered the "most abundant, most readily available, cleanest, and safest energy source on Earth," science writer Richard Martin. Thorium-based nuclear power is nuclear reactor-based, fuelled primarily by the nuclear fission of the isotope uranium-233 produced from the fertile element thorium. According to proponents, a thorium fuel cycle offers several potential advantages over a uranium fuel cycleincluding much greater abundance on Earth, superior physical and nuclear fuel properties, and reduced nuclear waste production. Some believe thorium is key to developing a new generation of cleaner, safer nuclear power. According to an opinion piece by a group of scientists at the Georgia Institute of Technology, considering its overall potential, thorium-based power "can mean a 1000+ year solution or a quality low-carbon bridge to truly sustainable energy sources solving a huge portion of mankinds negative environmental impact." After studying the feasibility of using thorium, nuclear scientists Ralph W. Moir and Edward Teller suggested that thorium nuclear research should be restarted after a three-decade shutdown and that a small prototype plant should be built. The World Nuclear Association explains some of the possible benefits:  Thorium is three times as abundant as uranium and nearly as abundant as lead and gallium in the Earth's crust. The Thorium Energy Alliance estimates "there is enough thorium in the United States alone to power the country at its current energy level for over 1,000 years. Almost all thorium is fertile Th-232, compared to uranium that is composed of 99.3% fertile U-238 and 0.7% more valuable fissile U-235. Canadian CANDU reactors are capable of using thorium. It is very difficult to make a practical nuclear bomb from a thorium reactor's by-products. There is much less nuclear wasteup to two orders of magnitude less, states Moir and Teller, eliminating the need for large-scale or long-term storage; "Chinese scientists claim that hazardous waste will be a thousand times less than with uranium." The radioactivity of the resulting waste also drops down to safe levels after just a few hundred years, compared to tens of thousands of years needed for current nuclear waste to cool off. According to Moir and Teller, "once started up it needs no other fuel except thorium because it makes most or all of its own fuel." This only applies to breeding reactors, which produce at least as much fissile material as they consume. Thorium fuel cycle is a potential way to produce long term nuclear energy with low radio-toxicity waste. In addition, the transition to thorium could be done through the incineration of weapons grade plutonium (WPu) or civilian plutonium. Since all natural thorium can be used as fuel no expensive fuel enrichment is needed. Comparing the amount of thorium needed with coal, Nobel laureate Carlo Rubbia of CERN, (European Organization for Nuclear Research), estimates that one ton of thorium can produce as much energy as 200 tons of uranium, or 3,500,000 tons of coal. Liquid fluoride thorium reactors are designed to be meltdown proof. A plug at the bottom of the reactor melts in the event of a power failure or if temperatures exceed a set limit, draining the fuel into an underground tank for safe storage.  Mining thorium is safer and more efficient than mining uranium. Thorium's ore monazite generally contains higher concentrations of thorium than the percentage of uranium found in its respective ore. This makes thorium a more cost efficient and less environmentally damaging fuel source. Thorium mining is also easier and less dangerous than uranium mining, as the mine is an open pit which requires no ventilation, unlike underground uranium mines, where radon levels can be potentially harmful.  I do support green energy such as wind, solar, geo-thermal, tidal etc. This could be part of an integrated energy network that includes all non-fossil fuels and bring us to zero carbon without any power interruptions or supply/demand issues.
Wonderful idea but we have to rebuild trust in the nuclear industry that they are trustworthy to manage the industry with truth, honesty and transparency.
Thorium reactors still produce high-level radioactive waste. They still pose problems and opportunities for the proliferation of nuclear weapons. They still present opportunities for catastrophic accident scenarios -- as potential targets of terrorist or military attack, for example. The fundamental problems associated with nuclear power have by no meansbeen eliminated. 
Not only do we need Thorium, a Liquid Fluoride Thorium Reactor (#LFTR) is one of the best ways to do it in my mind. It doesn't deal with Thorium as a solid but rather a liquid which I'm told is much easier to deal with. There is so much reference material out there on LFTR that you can just search it. Kirk Sorensen explains all of it in so many different ways, I feel like I gain a new understanding of it every time I watch a presentation from him. I'll let him explain LFTR better than I ever could on Youtube.  If you're more of a Wiki person here are a couple links you can look at! https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liquid_fluoride_thorium_reactor https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flibe_Energy
Provide incentives for people to use less energy (e.g, tax rebates) and make energy efficient and clean energy options easily accessible
Thanks for your suggestion. Did you know that Canada already has a variety of incentives available to become more energy efficient? You can find the incentives for your province here. Come back and let us know if any of these work for you. We would also encourage you to specify any that are not there that you would like to see.
This is my search result: Location:OntarioSource:Federal governmentSector:ALLProgram Types:Awareness/Information,Training/Technical Assistance,Standards (Voluntary or Regulated),Financial Incentive,Energy Management and Monitoring,Retrofit,Rebate Search Results (0 found) I think it would be good if the federal government could pitch in some sort of incentive (that would turn up in this search) as encouragement for homeowners in all provinces. I'm kind of surprised that nothing turned up under "Awareness/Information".
Bring back the incentive to save on taxes by choosing to take public transit!
Only the poor (old women, young children, single moms & the mentally ill need a tax credit. the rest of us should use it because it's faster and less hassle
No need to re-invent the wheel. Technology is widely used in Europe. Reduces landfill space, provides energy, and can be implemented in remote areas. Non polluting as well.
Great idea - using a closed system that privates heat to buildings
I found a cool article about how a Chinese province was able to run fully on renewable sources for one week. Here is a link to the article:http://www.climateactionprogramme.org/news/chinese-province-runs-on-100-renewables-for-7-days 
1. Ontario desperately needs to find alternatives to the electricity source that generates 61% of its power and is: => unaffordable, uninsurable & undisposable 2. Mandate Solar on all new buildings. 3. Encourage Net Metering by homes & businesses. 4. Provide thoughtful consumer financial incentives, perhaps require Utilities to provide low-interest loans to buy Solar & Wind, attached to their Hydro or Gas bills. Small wind, and the 3 solars (electric, hot air, hot water), etc. are like buying a car, which most of us finance. This will provide another revenue stream for Utilities. 5. Ease the funny rules on installing Solar & Small Wind; they get more onerous each year. The extra approval costs & paperwork approach 10% of cost of equipment & installation. Perhaps the Utilities and IESO really don't want Distributed Energy? (Can you tell that I sell Renewable Energy to homes & small business?)
I'm a renter, and I can only do so much to reduce energy use. I have lived in many apartment buildings and every landlord tells me that there is no return on investment for improving insulation, heating methods, windows or doors. As a renter, I can move easily, so I live close to work and I walk to work, saving transportation energy. I am careful to reduce my usage, but my energy bill is always massive because the building is older and not well insulated. My suggestion is to tax apartment owners who own buildings where energy use is high.
Hi, thanks for sharing your thoughts on apartments. You raise excellent points about individuals having different opportunities for choices on energy efficiency depending on their circumstances. We do have incentives and rebates in place for landlords to renovate or upgrade homes to be more energy efficient, which can be found here. You can also see what programs might apply to you as a renter here as well.
Future building must have a new energy efficiency code. There are opportunities for buildings to become partially grid energy independent. Rooftop solar, battery storage and microgrid concepts are part of those concepts.
Provide incentives and programs on a national level to encourage businesses and individuals to switch to electric vehicles. We need to electrify transportation very quickly and make sure the grid is powered by renewable energy as much a small possible to stabilize the effects of climate change.
Thanks for your input! We have some good news for you. Canada is investing in building over 200 new charging stations across the country, especially in high traffic areas.  Canada has funding available to help organizations and communities with the costs of their alternative fuel infrastructure. The Electric Vehicle and Alternative Fuel Infrastructure Deployment Initiative aims to increase the awareness and use of lower carbon vehicles and fuels in Canada. You can find more information about it here.
I still can't buy a small SUV that is electric for my family. They are making small cars that are not suited to families or super cars that are beyond my average means. I don't want a combustion engine in my next vehicle!! but I can't afford a Tesla or BMW so what other choices do I have? When will the government get serious about incentivizing vehiclemanufacturersto design better electric vehicles? OR when will incentives to buy electric get better for middle-class families to subsidize purchases? 
The deficiencies of electric vehicles need to be addressed before we rush headlong into this widespread use of electric vehicles, such as; 1. The steady degrading nature of batteries in electric vehicles - similar to all batteries, accordingly range of electric vehicles will decrease as batteries degrade. 2. Waste handling of toxic batteries from electric vehicles - waste dumps will have to be engineered to prevent contamination of soils and water from toxic battery materials such as lithium. 3. Will countries be able to afford the huge extra costs involved in upgrading wiring of residential homes, upgrading electrical grids to handle increased power requirements, build out of additional power plants to handle the increased electrical load. 4. Studies should be done to compare the additional carbon footprint of the an expanded electrical infrastructure and compare this to the savings in electric cars over gasoline cars. 5. Lost time using el. veh.
I travel a lot for work and see how some countries have definitely adopted solar panels. Some countries like Belgium, more famous for their rain than their sun, offered enough tax incentives to guarantee widespread adoption. With this large quantity of customers, the industry created jobs and revenues that balanced the cost of the tax breaks, prices got lower for the next round of customers, with minimum carbon footprint and (nice bonus:) the outdated nuclear power plants are less often overloaded. The system provided to us in Ontario is simply not attractive enough. BigMistake that I wish the federal and provincial governments can fix together.
Thanks for your suggestion! Canada has a number of incentives for adopting solar power, such as theResidential and Commercial Solar Program and more. There is also a municipal fund in place to help municipal governments become more energy efficient through green power (including solar) here. Please feel free to review the rebates and funds, then come back and let us know if you see any gaps or have more ideas.
I do not wish for the government to incentivize rooftop solar with my tax dollars. These systems barely payout in their lifetime even WITH the tax breaks or incentives. That is the definition of insanity.  I'm quite happy paying 4 cents per kWhr here in Alberta where we generate our electricity with cheap reliable coal. 
You are so negative for excellent idea. Try to think positive ... the time for a change has arrived. I worked in Alberta for one of the utility company before I retired. In many projects my team designed new substations and transmission lines ... yes those ugly steel structures inside and outside of our cities. I wish we stop constructing those. As an Albertan you should know that Southern Alberta has the best sun in Canada. Opportunity is there to produce your own energy cheaper than this from the grid and even make your own money (check ViZn battery vendor offer). Coal is not good but still over 90% of Alberta energy comes from fossil fuel. This is not only about CO2 but also about all of the other harmful heavy metal particles emitted. The idea of solar panels/shingles on every roof is great. We will not use your tax dollars. It will be included in mortgages same as water and electrical installations we have included today. 
Several provinces and territories have moved forward smartly on replacing heat from fossil fuels with biomass heat, while provinces like Ontario and Nova Scotia have lagged behind, in large part due to nonsensical, lengthy and costly environmental processes, sometimes taking 2 years. It is time to address all environmental processes to enable achieving overall environmental objectives. 
Thanks for sharing your thoughts on environmental assessments! The Government of Canada has been working to review its environmental and regulatory processes over the past year. We are presently seeking feedback on a discussion paper on our proposed approach. You can participate by going to Canada.ca/environmentalreviews. Thanks again for your feedback!
Does this expedited review process you are suggesting apply to pipelines as well? We, in New Brunswick, have had a generational opportunity (the Energy East Pipeline) effectively killed by the Federal Government's manipulation of the NEB approval process and scope. How utterly ridiculous that we, on the east coast are forced to continue to import unethical oil from the gulf states while we have such an incredible resource here in Canada. Canada could gain an immense benefit by getting this resource to the east coast where it could be sold at market prices instead of being sold at a discount to the US. 
In many jurisdictions in Europe, landfill is not an option and at the same time the EU member countries has to comply with binding targets of lowering the CO2 emissions. A solution that many communities do is to use incinerators to burn MSW - municipal solid waste producing heat that in turn generates electricity. The electricity is sold to the spot market www.nordpoolspot.com while the heat is distributed via DH - district heating pipes to connected buildings for heating purposes. In some cases the MSW is burnt in combination with bark from the wood processing industry! Modern incinerators uses multiple cleaning steps to capture harmful emissions. Incinerator's would help communities throughout Canada to produce local energy and at the same time get rid of landfill sites. In Europe for example, incinerator plants can even get paid to receive other communities MSW, so for those operating the Incinerators it gives kind of adouble revenue, and it is a good business forthe community that owns the plant. Example Dva Energy Plant in Ume, Sweden: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ume%C3%A5_Energi
It is also possible to recover metals from the waste and ash. This can result in a significant revenue stream
Qubec city is studying a project like that.
There are countless opportunities to implement biomass power, especially in northern communities, and there is plenty of sustainable biomass to support such development. However antiquated legislation, such as steam boiler staffing regulations not seen in Europe for years, craters the economics of many small power projects. In Ontario these regulations even halt utilisation of Italian ORC technology, even though this technology does not operate with steam. There is too much emphasis on large power, such as the concept to run expensive hydro lines to northern Ontario. Currently many of these communities run diesel engines for heat and power. A much more eloquent solution is to develop renewable pyrolysis oil plants in the North using local biomass as a feedstock, and providing permanents jobs for locals. The pyrolysis oil would then fuel diesels or turbines for power.   
I agree that steam ticket requirements are a hurdle but also the high capital cost of Bioenergy relative to low or unpredictable power prices in places like Alberta. Alberta currently has excess wood waste and at the same time they are burning massive amounts of coal. Recently a large pellet plant has been announced which will take wood waste, make pellets and ship them to Asia or Europe to displace coal. The plant will be located almost next door to massive coal fired power plants near Edmonton. The economics are not currently in place to use the biomass to generate power in Alberta.
Thanks for your input and recommendations! We certainly agree that biomass is an exciting and emerging source of energy. Did you know that CanmetENERGY has a Bioenergy Systems group that works with universities and the industry to monitor the needs of the biomass community and provide relevant advice and information? Find out more here!  NRCan also has a Canadian Biomass Innovation Network that sends out regular news items related to the development of bioenergy. You can sign up here.
Passive House is a very energy efficient way of building houses, and is since some time more or less the building code in countries like Austria and Germany. In comparison with the Ontario building code, the annual energy saving in a PH is in the level of 10 times. For example pay $200 annually in heating cost rather than $2000! It is a big difference. In countries where PH is not the building code, the extra cost of a PH is in the level of 6-7% when considering also the operation cost of 20-30 years. Why not make PH the building code in Canada and save much energy? What I like is that PH uses a lot of wood, however as it is now, much of the PH-certified materials have to be imported from elsewhere. This opens up opportunities for the Canadian industry to be innovative and start developing very energy efficient products and components. Canadian Passive House Institute http://www.passivehouse.ca/
Thanks for your suggestion! NRCan has funded a few projects in British Columbia that have built Passive Houses. You can find more information about the project here and infographics here.
I think the Building Code should phase-in the Passive House standard, especially since the info on passivehouse.ca indicates that it is far more practical to build a house to Passive House standards from the start than to try to retrofit it later. Beyond that, I think we need to create a demand for this style of housing, perhaps by teaming up with home renovation trade shows, decorating magazines and real estate/renovation shows on TV... make it appealing from a trend-setting, aesthetic angle.
Passive houses sound like a great idea. I may be looking to build a house in the near future and certainly want to be as passive and green as possible.
Using the sun to light and heat our homes would reduce energy consumption considerably. It would likely improve the happiness of the occupants as well :) I highly recommend the first few chapters of "Let It Shine: The 6, 000-Year Story of Solar Energy" by John Perlin. One relevant anecdote ishow the Greeksused passive design for their buildings and towns when the availability of local wood for heating was diminishing. One philosopher said "Only primitives & barbarians lack knowledge of houses turned to face the Winter sun."
Tony Seba, a disruptive technologies analyst from Stanford U, has been following the energy sector for a number of years.. watch his informative YouTube video via the following URL Tony Seba on disruptive technologies In his video, he highlights periods of our history where disruptive technologies have changed the course of our society over the last 120 yrs. I believe that our governments need to pay close attention to these real indicators when it comes to investing in our energy future. We need to wake up to the fact that is oil and gas are not going to be a big part of that energy mix. So why spend billions of dollarson future stranded assets that we as ratepayers are going to be left with. Let's focus our energies on technologies that support these disruptions and build a stronger Canada!
Disruptive innovative technologies are important, as you mention! Canadas new Impact Canada Fund, introduces a new mission- or challenge-based approach for the federal government and help focus and accelerate efforts to solve Canadas big challenges. The Impact Canada Fund will focus its initial efforts in two streams:   A clean technology stream,supported by up to $75 million over two years, starting in 201718, to address challenges such as helping Canadas rural and remote communities reduce their reliance on diesel as a power source. A smart cities stream,supported by $300 million over 11 years that will support the Smart Cities Challenge. Find out more here! 
I feel that subsidies to the oil companies should end and that money should be reallocated to develop new and different disruptive energy systems. Evolve or die.
One of the best models is for the Existing Energy Companies to transition into new energy products. For example Shell had Hydrogen fuel station projects. Conversion to run a standard Gas Vehicle on Hydro is not that complex. So existing car makers could simply produce Hydrogen powered cars. .
Downsize wood pelleltizing technology to make it feasible/economical for the farmer or property owner with a small woodlot to produce his own source of heating fuel from deadfalls, storm damaged trees, limbing, pruning, etc.
Of interest perhaps: http://www.fao.org/docrep/t0512e/T0512e00.htm The Swedes have done a lot of work on using wood pellets to power vehicles.
1. Floating solar panels 2. Eliminate coal power generators where it is still used 3. National energy grid
In 2050 we see kinetic energy as a widely used form of renewable energy.  One way way of incorporating kinetic energy is to use it in transportation industry. For example, there is a road in the works that is equipped with the ability to collect energy from the cars that drive on it.
I love this idea and have thought that in a mall the weight of the people walking through the building could probably produce an enormous amount of energy. Something like an area of tiles that people walk on or an area that cars drive through that uses gravity and mass to capture energy. Definitely worth thinking about.
In 2050 Canada will have implemented waste to energy systems.  This can increase garbage trade. For example, the United States or Mexico could export their garbage for us to transform it into energy.
Thanks for that suggestion. You might be interested in checking out this demonstration that converted urban waste into electricity. Come back and let us know what you think!
1. We want to promote the placement of solar panels in place of windows on high rise buildings in and around downtown cores such as downtown Toronto. 2. Making our schools more green. Ensuring that our schools are functioning in an eco friendly manner and those skills and habits are being taught in elementary and secondary school. 3. More incentive to promote green energy especially amongst small businesses.
A great read about the functional testing of this concept (solar panel transparent windows) is: "Pairing of near-UV solar cells with electrochromic windows for smart management of the solar spectrum doi:10.1038/nenergy.2017.104 
2050 will move towards community networks that focus on various types of renewable energy (water, wind, solar, geothermal) exchanged through houses to reduce production and distribute energy effectively. Communities should have the opportunity to rent or purchase solar roof tiles, water mills (small sized), etc.
Thanks for telling us your energy future! Check out some of these community based projects for energy use that exist here and here. Come back and let us know what you think!
I would be interested to learn more about the idea of small generators in many houses connected and sharing power. Why is this idea compelling to you? I quite like the current system where a single enormous power plant produces clean electricity and it gets distributed to 1,000s ofhomes, controlled centrally so it can ramp up production when everyone wakes up on a winter's morning. The picture of lots of small generators would seem to involve a lot more waste and inefficiency so overall we'd be generating more power. A small number of large hydro dams or nuclear plants can do the same but more efficiently (and probably cheaply).
To transfer to a renewable system requires a local approach that understands the specifics of the community. Solar may not be possible throughout the year in every community, do we transfer energy that is collected or build better batteries?
How is energy being used in 2050? - Heating, transportation - No longer using coal - Geothermal energy - Factories will use at least 50% clean energy - Northern communities can generate tons of solar power to send all over Canada - Plant-based buildings - Sidewalks that generate energy - Costal regions use lots of tidal energy - Increase of use of nuclear energy (small amount of waste) - We need to be cognizant of how much water these nee methods can use - Energy production will involve large-scale consultation will all communities How are Canadians engaging with energy? - More Canadian produce their own energy with solar panels - Oil and gas will be used solely for transportation (not heating homes) - Recycling and composting will be the norm, lowering our contribution to pollution - More people are using electric vehicules - Cities will invest to fund charging stationsand electric cars will become moremainstream and affordable - More people will use public transportation to reduce carbon footprint How do we ensure energy remains a source of jobs, and is affordable to Canadians? - Givingnon-renewable energy workers the skills to transfer and thrive in this new era of renewable energy - Oil and gas companies will diverskfy their products 
Thanks for your suggestions. That is a well thought out future for Canada! Youll be glad to know that were working on many projects that demonstrate how renewable and clean energy systems can work.  Wehave funding available to help organizations and communities with the costs of their alternative fuel infrastructure. The Electric Vehicle and Alternative Fuel Infrastructure Deployment Initiative aims to increase the awareness and use of lower carbon vehicles and fuels in Canada. You can find more information about it here.
I would like to see the completeremoval of fossil fuel subsidies for investment into renewable energy.Peer-reviewedstudies have proven that if the same investment that is being put into fossil fuels is transferred toward renewable energy we will not only improve the state of our environment but we will have energy security, MORE jobs than those provided by the fossil fuel industry, an economy that is less vulnerable to shocks, and energy independence.
I completely agree with you. There should be no more subsidies for fossil fuel companies; they make billions of dollars every year, they do not need our public money, and the much newer and greener energy industry could certainly use it for R&D. Canada needs to change with the times and oil is the past.
We need to encourage urban planners to allow space to plant deciduous trees at the south-facing side of houses and other buildings. Just as penny saved is a penny earned, perhaps a kilowatt saved is a kilowatt generated? Trees can significantly decrease the amount of air conditioning needed. When I was a kid, we had big maple trees on the south side of my house. I would walk around comfortably in jeans in my house and the area close to it, not realizing that it was actually blistering hot out. According to a researcher from l'Universit du Qubec en Outaouais, one can measure a 17-degree difference between two locations that are only 500 metres apart--because the cooler place has trees. (His interview is at 17 h 38 on http://ici.radio-canada.ca/premiere/emissions/sur-le-vif/episodes/382652/audio-fil-du-lundi-5-juin-2017 (in French only).) Depending on the size and type of tree you plant, a tree can cost as little as a few dollars to less than two hundred to plant. Trees can go without any maintenance for decades, but planting them could also generate jobs for arborists (who know how to trim and take care of them properly) and landscape designers, both of whom should be required to play a role in the design phase of the built environment. I'm not sure how much research has been done on quantifying the potential energy savings (need less air conditioning) as a result of having south-side deciduous trees, and comparing the performance of different species, but it would be good to fund more research like that. And coniferous trees are supposed to help block cold north winds in the winter...
New York is undertaking a special project, in someareas in the city,to plant more trees and paint roofs with reflective paint in order to provide cooling. Search "$106 million Cool Neighborhoods NYC program"
The GoC needs to lower the tax rate and guaranteed that low rate for the future on clean energy businesses and products in order to shift investment into green technology. This will prove that Canada is motivated to stopping climate change and updating our energy production from non-renewable to renewable energy.
By creating a fridge that shared, compressor and electronics, between two, or even four, or 8 , apartments. Reduction in heat loss surface area, by 2 sides per unit shared. Reduction of costs, by sharing compressor, compressor gas, electronics. Savings can be added back in quality, and even higher energy efficient design. Could be add into the Canadian Building code, for Kitchens in Buildings, to design to have shared , fridges.   
In B.C many older homes don't have the required electrical Service from B.C Hydro to, make use of newer On demand hot water heaters. But two homes beside each other could share one On Demand Hot water system. And each home would provide half the power used, to the On Demand Hot water heater. Since the system would have piping out side already, addition of , solar hot water heaters would be, possible, By proving hot water to multiple homes the system reduces it pay back time by large amount. Reduction in cost of, setup of new Home Electrical Panels, and rewiring by B.C Hydro to the home. Long term savings from , reduced heating loss, from standard Hot water Tank systems Within the mix you could add, heat pump hot water pre heater, with the solar heater, and the, On Demand heater servicing mutiple homes. 
I read a great study of this, concept which involved a heat exchanger -- the computer model predicted "the proposed infrastructure is able to harvest between 50% and 75% of the wastewater energy in a smart residential building". Lynggaard, P., Skouby, K. E. Complex IoT Systems and enablers for smart homes in a smart city vision. Sensors. 15 (1840). pp 1-14. doi:10.3390/s16111840
By allowing buildings to share walls, but be built on different lots. Saving in building materials, savings in Heat loss, long term. Best model would be, 4 homes sharing , common walls between them. Of course they could also share other home systems, like 4 fridges , running off one compressor.
http://www.tiem.utk.edu/~gross/bioed/bealsmodules/area_volume.html As size of building increases, volume to surface area decreases. Sharing internal walls, results in decreased thermal loss's from the reduction in total surface area to volume ratio. 
I intended my first comment as an Idea post. Your building code change idea is long overdue. 
We need to rethink and, as a government, rework how people commute and travel. Japan has had great success with their 100% electric high-speed rail network. It would be worthwhile to investigate the possibility of a public private partnership to develop a comparable network in Canada, lessening the need for automobile transportation over long distances.
Especially a transportation network that spans the country. In the past year, train service has been lost to Churchill, MB, and bus service has been lost for most of Saskatchewan! Via-Rail and its next iteration need to be built so we don't have to depend on air travel and private cars. Self driving electric cars are available, but the Supercharger network they presently need is not build across Canada yet. It's promised for the end of 2017, but I don't see construction happening in time.
In countries where there's widespread urban areas like the US, supercharger networks are viable. In Canada, especially in Eastern, Northern, and Prairie Canada, there's just far too much empty space to make large supercharger networks possible or commercially viable. A new generation of mass- and commercial-transport networks are necessary to keep Canada connected and competitive. High speed rails, especially all-electric models with integrated batteries, would have cheaper operating costs than current rails and more consistent services.
We have developed an idea, and a proof of concept, whereby, we are able to generate electricity without fuel, or chemicals. It is similar in concept to a windmill, that does not have blades. It can be scaled to any size required, and can power electric cars, homes etc. If you wish to speak with me please contact me directly for more informations.
Do you have a peer reviewed article to support this, or a website where we could take a look at your 'device.' It sounds good, too good to be true? More details would be great so we could actually know what you are talking about!
The device doesn't obey the laws of physics, so I'm not in favour of it, sorry.
A new solar cell might become the most efficient solar cell in the world.  https://techxplore.com/news/2017-07-scientists-solar-cell-captures-energy.html
That would be okay, but even with standard solar cells available today, we could totally revolutionize Canada's electrical grids.
Here's an idea: Plan for the Government of Canada with its federal buildings, to produce more solar electricity than I currently do. In 2 years I've generated over 5 MWh of power for the grid in Regina, Sask. Presently the Government of Canada, the Province of Saskatchewan, and the City of Regina's buildings in Regina all produce 0 MWh of clean solar power. You could exceed my generation level in months with a good investment, or a year with a small $25000 investment in renewable power generation.
I'm hoping people will comment with how much solar power your city produces. I produce more than the City of Winnipeg, Regina, Moose Jaw, Yorkton, Prince Albert, and dozens of others in western Canada. I produce less than the Cities of Ottawa and Saskatoon.
It would be a good idea for the Government to be able to generate its own, power.  I would also suggest Wind even micro hydro systems, besides Solar,  the power grid is not that reliable and government services must be running. You would think High office towers could add a few, wind generators.    
There are online systems that show real-time stats about power production, also.https://monitoringpublic.solaredge.com/solaredge-web/p/site/public?name=SoundSolar-J.Klein#/dashboard
Natural Resources could copy the best content from Environment Canada's identical public outreach campaign from last year called #CANClimateAction. Think of the time saved, both for those who think contributing will steer this government toward implementing any of the great solutions, and the government won't have to pretend as hard that it's listening to Canadians that want climate action now!
If there's information available that would fast track this process, the Government should be using it.
Computer Run time is Energy USED, most government software is written in very non , optimized methods with no regard for Energy USE. Energy use is not even a design consideration, in the software engineering process. You can create a Energy Used, calculator for the Governments core, Compilers and Computer Languages, to enable their , Programmers to optimize this. I would think if you recompile the Governments software using AI computer, programed to optimize for energy use, IE lower time solutions. Of course you could simply , make the Government , use better Compilers and Languages to write their software in. And you could use better more advanced algorithms , in the Code, to create , much faster programs, that then, use less power. Perhaps the reduction of data collection that is not needed, would help to reduce computer run time.    
seems to be a good idea. As government, it should provide best practice on this to encourage IT industry to consider. That couldbe more effective.
Canada does not have a reliable centralized agency that collects data from all aspects, oil, gas, coal, electricity, it's supply and demand and usage. Often the quality is questionable and methods of calculation vary from one organization to the next. We need one.
When the warm days of the year arrive and we put our winter clothes away for a few months, I find myself carrying scarfs and sweaterswith me in order to be comfortable indoors in what I find are over-cooled restaurants, office buildings, government buildings, classrooms and other public and private places.I have the impression that indoor temperatures are often colder during the summer, when buildings are cooled, thanthey arein winter, when buildingsare heated. There is a potential for energy savings in better management of indoors temperatures and in the general acceptance that part of the adaptation to seasonal weather can be done through the way we dress in the morning rather than throughenergy-inefficient air conditioning.
Thanks for that great suggestion. Its true that some buildings are overcooled during the summer. NRCan has resources available for building managers to make them more energy efficient, through energy benchmarking, retrofitting and making new structures energy efficient from the start.
Provide monetary incentives to landlords for energy and efficiency upgrades.
Thanks for suggestion! We have incentives and rebates in place for landlords to renovate or upgrade homes to be more energy efficient. Let us know what you think.
Passive solar greenhouses every where.
How does technology facilitate community empowerment? The rise of Blockchain technology in recent times has opened the door to many projects for creating self-reliant communities.A distributed peer to peer technology which can empower the community to have their own governance model is a very powerful differentiator now. We have been looking into various sectors for community empowerment and the one which we feel really passionate about is the energy sector. As the need for green/renewable energy is growing we feel we can empower the community to produce, store and trade clean energy within the community.The trading of energy can be achieved on a distributed peer to peer network, without involving any third party aggregators. The concept of trading excess energy to your neighborhood facilitates prudential usage of energy thereby reducing wastageto a bare minimum.It also has the added benefit of cutting the transmission losses to minimum, as most of the energy is distributed locally within the community
Thank you for that great suggestion! Check out some of these community based projects for solar and geothermalenergy. Come back and let us know what you think!
Better use of Nuclear Power. Use old decommissioned mines as storage facilities for spent fuel cells. A lot of these mines are 1000 feet deep. The fuel rod could be stored in steel casing surrounded on all sides by a cement cushion
Check out the LFTR technology (liquid fluoride thorium reactor). It's a much better developing type of nuclear than uranium. There is a TED talk with a guy named Kirk Sorensen at the University of Alberta where he explains it (link here: https://goo.gl/HXNDZk). Very promising technology. Nuclear is part of a clean future. Uranium should be phased out and is only being used in Ontario right now anyways.
Canada is such a big country with a relatively underdeveloped railway system. Compared to Europe, Canada is a very young country with lots of potential for development. It needs, therefore, to look at its railway system and be able to transport people and commodity more efficiently. To connect remote rural provinces, transport people and commodity, Canada has to make every effort in providing an energy-efficient railway system. Recent developments in Europe make trains run on clean and renewable energy. Although not yet a matured technology, Canada should look at the possibility and try to implement the technology in connecting the remotest rural places, "little-by-little", to city centers and to ports and piers. It will provide her people a clean, efficient and affordable transport system, as well as, safe and pleasurable trips to enjoy the beauty of the vast nation.  
Electrification of rail is a good example of how a country can take action on climate change / clean air at a national level, instead of asking individual citizens to make lifestyle changes. People and businessesare going to use the train regardless. If the government has invested in electric rail, each commuter's trip is cleaner for the environment. Wind isn't the answer on its own of course - steady baseload electricity from large hydro has beenthe foundation of Canada's energy system since the beginning. Hydro and nuclear electricity powering rail (and electric cars) is the simple answer.
The government should facilitate/incentivize rural community funded solar powered EV charging stations. The money paid by electric vehicle charging goes back to the community members who invested through a virtual net metering program. Like a community garden, a community solar installation would allow people who are not able to invest in solar panels (because they're renting, or don't have the ideal roof conditions) to have the opportunity to invest in the project by paying upfront for a number of panels. Larger scale community solar projects would also cost less due to economies of scale. This could also be combined with EV charging stations. Then whencars are charging, the EV customer is supplimenting/paying for the solar project. If higher rates are used for charging it could improve the economics of the solar project. And chargers would feel good knowing that money paid to charge their EV goes back into the community. Recent study showed that EV charging infrastructure is lacking outside of larger cities. Encouraging communities to invest in their own charging stations means less government investment is required for EV infrastructure, and the projects get people excited about electric vehicles.  
I think community funded solar EV charging stations are a great idea as there is a huge lacking of them outside urban centers. I would really like to use an EV but the only place to charge it in small town Northern Ontario would be my own house. Not great yet for those longer trips, so I really hope the infrastructure develops.
The cost of solar power and energy storage is dropping.The increasing use of affordable renewable power generation is triggering new types of consumer and community behavior. These changes represent unique opportunities for communities. Community Power models engage utilities, communities, consumers, and other key stakeholders, in a way that focuses on community power goals. Community Power solutions are orchestrated by automated business rules that manage the flow of electrons and currency to empower a new age of energy prosumers. Learn more at https://lnkd.in/eDEpHME.
Governments are huge players in our economy, so they can make a big difference in the clean energy transition. Government procurement should require low-carbon outcomes and support clean technology, as described in Clean Energy Canada's recent report "The Power of Procurement" (attached and available here).
Agreed! I also think packaging should be assessed and regulated.
The global transition to clean energy is creating new demand for metals and minerals that go into solar panels, wind turbines, electric vehicle batteries, and so on. Canada is home to many of these materials, making the clean energy transition an important opportunity for our country's mining sector. Mining for Clean Energy, a recent report from Clean Energy Canada, describes the metal and mineral requirements associated with solar power, Canada's potential in those areas, and recommends a responsible approach to mining to help realize those opportunities.
The Government of Canada is developing a national strategy for zero-emission vehicles. This op-ed recommends providing rebates to people who buy (or drive) electric cars as one way to help get more Canadians into cars that don't run on gasoline. We also know that Canadians who want to drive cleaner cars often face long waiting lists, so we support a requirement that a growing fraction of each auto manufacturers' sales be electric, or other zero-emission,vehicles -- a policy that Quebec, California, and other US states have in place today.
This is a great idea, the more electric or hydrogen vehicles out there the better!
This is one of the best options to reduce transportation emissions over time. Dropping battery prices mean that by the early 2020s we may not even need purchase rebates since EVs should be the same price or cheaper than the equivalent gas-powered car. But we definitely need more EVs available to buy in Canada. If the Federal government could incentivize more EV production in Ontario or elsewhere in Canada, that would also be a boost for our economic development.
I agree,requiring that a growing fraction of each auto manufacturers' sales be electric, or other zero-emission,vehicleswill help to make more EVs available to Canadians and will complement incentives that are available to potential purchasers of EVs. It is ridiculous that there is currently only one Chevy Bolt available for test drives in all of Ontario. How can we expectconsumers to buy EVs if they can't see them and/or drive them.
I see more and more Tesla vehicles in BC. Almost every day I see one now which is amazing. Electric vehicles are coming and if you look at the wait list for Tesla Model 3 there are only going to be more and more. Tesla is maxing out their production somewhere near 5,000 cars per week as they ramp up. So this is amazing. The issue to remember is that electric vehicles still need to consume power. So by themselves they are diverting pollution out of cities (because they don't burn fuel directly) but they still don't solve the power generation problem. Based on the 2017 breakdown of Canadian energy production we are producing 76% of our energy through Crude Oil and Natural Gas (43% crude oil, 33% natural gas) so electric vehicles are primarily powered by these technologies. Electric vehicles are amazing, but we also need to address the fundamental production of energy. Check out the government breakdown page 25 of the Canadian Energy Fact Book here:https://goo.gl/K38YyU
what if you found out that the incentives the government hands out actually come off your pay check in the form of taxes- do you still want to subsidize everyone's EV?  I'll keep my money thank you very much.  Let EVs stand on their own feet. If they make sense then people will buy them. The only reason Tesla is in business is because they sell their EV credits to other car manufacturers who don't sell enough EVs in CA and because there are huge rebates to consumers who buy electric cars in the US. It is a Ponzi scheme to be sure.
Switching from fossil fuels to clean electricity is an essential climate solution across our economy. Canada is well-positioned for this transition, as two-thirds of our electricity comes from renewable sources today. In the 2016 reportA Canadian Opportunity (attached), a group of clean energy experts and stakeholders recommended policies to support the clean energy transition in sectors like transportation, buildings, other industrial processes, and electricity supply. We also recommended that Canadian governments develop a national "roadmap," or action plan, to lay out a national vision, fill information gaps and help overcome barriers to electrification.
Why do cars need to have access to everystreet downtown? Cities around the world, Melbourne is one example, have been converting certain main downtown streets into pedestrian and public transportation zones. No cars allowed. As a result, there is less noise, cleaner air, and sidewalks can be widened making space for cafes and restaurants. Business owners think that car traffic means increased sales, but the data shows that foot traffic is more important. What if cities around Canada closed down car access in a few downtown blocks for a day every week? 
I think this is a valid idea to reduce traffic and emission. This might require extra support on parking space around downtown area and frequent public transportation.
Great idea! I would include bicycle lanes in the mix.
Putting in safer ways to bike effectively across cities is going to cut down on emission and traffic. Creating traffic that favours biking will encourage that mode of transportation, and offer longer, healthier lifespans for people (with more exercise). Copenhagen has modelled traffic that makes it faster for people to travel by bike than car, or equal pace. (Plus they have similar weather conditions to Canada). I think it would be great to support local businesses and the overall well being of the population.https://www.theglobeandmail.com/globe-drive/what-bicycle-friendly-copenhagen-can-teach-us-about-commuting/article34233541/
More interconnections between Canada's provinces and territories would allow us to make better use of our clean electricity. See more context and some recommendations from Clean Energy Canadain this op-ed.
BURN GAS INSTEAD OF COAL
As the demand for renewable and cleaner electricity continues to grow, Canadian company Hydrostor is leading the charge in a new innovative energy storage concept to help assist with offsetting the intermittent nature of wind and solar power. This new technology takes compressed air and stores it in large underwater balloons at the bottom of Lake Ontario. When energy is needed, the balloons are deflated forcing the air back out through turbines to generate power.  Hydrostor began construction of the prototype Hydrostor Station on Toronto Island back in 2015 and it is the worlds first-ever underwater compressed air energy storage system. It took several years to design and build the underwater storage unit and onshore energy conversion system. During times of higher demand, the weight of the water against the balloons forces the air back to the surface through a large pipe and an expander converts it back into electricity. The station is expected to improve power quality for Toronto Island residents during the performance-testing period.  The storage system has a capacity of 660 KW, enough to power approximately 330 homes at peak output and the system can run for about an hour. With this system, requirements for backup diesel and natural gas capacity for Island residents are lower and Hydrostor claims the balloon system is about half the cost of storage batteries and can last twice as long.  What do you think of this new innovative technology? Sound off in the comments below!  
I like the idea of this Hydrostor generation. Does it work like a battery? Or does it use pressure to actually generate electricity? From their website and videos it appears that you would use grid power to fill an air chamber of some sort and then simply power up the turbines to utilize the power. Is this how it works?
As I understand it -- it's an energy caching solution, like a battery, except simply air in elastic chambers, underwater. http://ca.reuters.com/article/businessNews/idCAKBN1532SL
Canada has a tremendous opportunity to build upon its inherent strengths and take a cleantech leadership position in the production of bioenergy and bioproducts produced from sustainable biomass. This document, which identifies why biomass should be the cornerstone of Canadas greenhouse gas (GHG) reduction and economic growth policies, is intended to initiate a dialogue between policy makers, large GHG emitting sectors, and biomass feedstock and technology suppliers that will result in deployment of Canadas biomass resources to reduce GHG emissions.
Thanks for your suggestion! Did you know that CanmetENERGY has a Bioenergy Systems group that works with universities and the industry to monitor the needs of the biomass community and provide relevant advice and information?  NRCan also has a Canadian Biomass Innovation Network that sends out regular news items related to the development of bioenergy. You can sign up here.
We cannot afford to squander resources on high-cost nuclear re-builds in Ontario. Instead we should be investing in energy efficiency and securing low-cost water power from Quebec.The federal government should incentivize conservation efforts and support inter-provincial transmission integration, enabling Canada to move to a 100% renewable grid.
Phasing out of nuclear and it's never ending, increasing tax payers monies for nuclear energy and all of it's waste materials that are made from obtaining the fuel necessary to run a nuclear plant to the actual reactor wastes to run the nuke plant is a must to be stopped now. Along with low-cost, clean energy efficient water power from Quebec, further investments should be made in solar and wind energy including battery studies done for increased storage capabilities for our electrical grid.
I agree that a nuclear phaseout is called for. For many reasons. The waste problem alone is sufficient reason to put an end to nuclear power.
This is not a practical option for the environment or economy. Nuclear has to be part of a low carbon future. Anyone promoting 100 percent renewables is at best naive and at worst has an agenda funded by the gas industry. Look at the facts and the science people. We need to have an open, pragmatic and adult conversation on this. Not a conversation among tub thumpers. The future is too important for this....
Nuclear current accounts for 16% of Canada's electricity. This is a reliable, low carbon source of energy which will sustain our populations energy needs while other energy sources mature. Wind, solar, hydro and tidal all sound warm and fuzzy, but each come with consequences of their own - where do materials come from, impacts on local environment (fisheries and birds), amount of land required to generate power, etc. Education is extremely important and people should do their research before jumping to conclusions.
The only nuclear power reactors we have in Canada are in New Brunswick (1) and Ontario (18 working). Both provinces could get all their power with a combination of existing water power, conservation and other green energies. And they could do so at a fraction of the cost of rebuilding our aging nuclear fleet. In Ontario's case, nuclear power prices have increased 60% in the last decade, and now OPG has requested a further tripling of the price they receive to rebuild the Darlington nuclear station. It just makes no economic sense to lock us into high cost nuclear power when much lower cost options exist, like cinservatuinm water, wind and solar. And why on earth would we risk a catastrophic nuclear accident (hello Fukushima!) when we have lower cost and safer options?
I agree the old uranium technology should be phased out, it's a very inefficient process for the fuel and leaves too much waste. But if you look at Kirk Sorensen's work around the LFTR (liquid fluoride thorium reactor) technology it is intriguing. Uses much more common ingredients, doesn't pose a meltdown risk and could provide all of our energy needs moving forward. China is experimenting with it, but because of irrational resistance to the word "nuclear" we have not moved forward in North America. Worth looking into, there is a TED Talk at the University of Calgary with Kirk. I agree that we should use other sources as well, but if we can get the LFTR technology in production I think it would change humanity, unlimited food production, mass recycling, large scale water desalination, etc.
Thorium reactors still produce high-level radioactive waste. They still pose problems and opportunities for the proliferation of nuclear weapons. They still present opportunities for catastrophic accident scenarios -- as potential targets of terrorist or military attack, for example. Proponents of thorium reactors argue that all of these risks are somewhat reduced in comparison with the conventional plutonium breeder concept. Whether this is true or not, the fundamental problems associated with nuclear power have by no meansbeen eliminated. http://www.ccnr.org/Thorium_Reactors.html
What "high cost" nuclear? Ontario nuclear electricity costs are amongst the lowest in developed countries. It is true that new nuclear technologies promise greater benefits, but solving the two issues of climate change and clean air needs no new technology or further innovation: nuclear and large hydro are reliable clean solutions with a demonstrated track record.
In the discussion of nuclear electricity generation, it is important not to confuse the word "waste" with the word "pollution". Yes nuclear waste is dangerous, and needs to be stored, but that is a simple engineering issue. The huge benefit of nuclear power is that tiny volumes of waste are produced: so small that it can easily all be stored. Contrast that with burning fossil fuel where waste volumes are so enormous that it is impossible to keep it all, so the waste inevitably becomes pollution.
re: waste - the danger may be low probability, but high consequence. They are deadly. And the wastes can't be easily stored, as you say. There have been 3 deep geologic repositories in the world that have stored nuke waste, and all have failed. These wastes need to be isolated from the environment for a million years, according to industry. We can't guarantee that and so should stop producing it.
re: cost - In Ontario, the provincial government has been very generous. With what was then Ontario Hydro essentially facing bankruptcy in the 1990s thanks to a series of bloated nuclear projects, the government kindly shuffled its massive debts off to a separate agency. Its kind of like having mom pay off your credit card, mortgage, car loan and cellphone bill and then claiming your living costs are lower than any of your friends. Even then, prices for nuclear power in ON have increased 60% in the last decade, and now OPG is requesting a tripling of the price they receive to rebuild Darlington. AT 16.5 cents (and that's before cost overruns) it's more than wind or even solar, and triple the price for water power from QC. We don't need to rebuild our nukes; we're next door to the 4th largest water power producer in the world.  
We have generous access to free resources in sun, wind and waves. We need to invest in developing processes to drive energy out of these resources which currently sit, largely unused. Source material=free; employment opps=unlimited. We should be running reward programs in every University for research and development of methods to begin to put this abundance to work. Added bonus=driving interest in the next generation while creating new areas of employment.
Why exclude large hydro from this list? Tidal has a similar great potential, though less common world-wide.Hydro dams are simple proven technology that make power day and night and are not intermittent like solar and wind.
unfortunately large Hydro has a very large environmental impact when you consider the reservoir size required to hold the water to power it. It displaces plants and animals from a very large area. For wind, tidal and solar, I can live with this as long as they are placed in your back yard and not mine.
The Canadian and provincial governments subsidize fossil fuels to the tune of billions of dollars (2010 number). If even a fraction of this amount was transferred to subsidizing electric vehicles and other clean technology, we would see far greater adoption of this technology by the public. This model has been demonstrated in Norway (where their energy use per capita is much lower, despite a similar climate) with Oslo being the electric vehicle capital of the world. In only a few years, clean technology will be the most cost competitive option regardless of government support, so let's accelerate the cost savings of scaling up with government help instead of helping industries that areinevitably going to die out anyway.
I like this idea, especially about electric cars. I just want to remind everyone that electric cars run on electricity which must be generated by some means. If you still use dirty technologies to generate the electricity for your car then it's just shifting the pollution outside of cities which is good. But it's not a long term solution. If we had a combination of clean energy production along with electric cars this is ideal!
The great thing about electric cars is that it eradicates the internal combustion engine. The internal combustion engine wastes 80% of its energy with heat! This fact really helps reduce my anxiety about our car addiction problem. Once we embrace the electric car, we will all breathe easier. 
Incentivize Renewables, natural buildings for low income housing, and off-grid housing. Stop Tar Sands... they are a national embarrassment and a scar on the earth Grow food domestically and in urban centres to curb imports. Reintroduce controlled burnings and natural farming methods. Protect Fresh Water Sources... stop selling our clean water to foreign and private interests. Put water governance in the hands of indigenous nations. Stop Salmon Farming... It it destroying the genetic health and diversity of salmon population. Invest in carbon capture aquaculture. Ban Inert waste. Incentivise Industry to deal with waste streams, or foot the bill to creating and expanding landfills.
Tar sands are a natural phenomenon. The oil under the surface of the ground literally bubbled up through the ground, not allowing the ground to be used for growing food, sustaining wildlife, nor even allowing the waterways to be safe for drinking. When technology progressed to be able to extract the oil from the sandy soil, the oil was the cleanest available in the world, is extracted without damaging the environment and, as a matter of fact, returns the earth surrounding to a better condition than prior to extraction, allowing it to be used to grow food, to provide usable water and to sustain wildlife. The communities surrounding the tar sands, including indigenous people are able to earn a good living in this sector, without causing undue hardship to the tax-payer.
The earliest written reports from 200 years agodescribed the Clearwater River as "shimmering waters" due to oil from oil sand deposits leeching into the river. This natural water contamination has been eradicated in the last 50 years by oil sands companies.
Keep developing our oil sands! They are a National Treasure!
On Teslas website, youll find their vision of the homes of the future, distinctly styled, but all equipped with a Tesla electric vehicle, sleek battery packs adorning their walls and electricity generating solar roofs.  The panels that make Teslas solar roofs fall into their own category: Building-Integrated Photovoltaics (BIPV). BIPVs are any photovoltaic materials used as part of a buildings structure. According to the National Renewable Energy Laboratory, in 2009, about 1% of solar installations were building-integrated. The company has been taking orders for their new solar photovoltaic roofs since early May in both Canada and the US, but do they stack up to the competition?  The bottom line is most important for consumers. Cost estimates for Tesla Roofs according to consumer reports for three US states are below:      House location   Square footage of Tesla roof    of which with solar cells (sq ft)   Cost of Tesla roof (US$)   Electricity savings over 30 years (US$)     New York   1,175   820   $38,400   $46,800     Texas   3,215   1,600   $85,200   $60,200     California   1,875   940   $49,200   $84,700     *Note: Only 50 to 70% of the roof is fitted with solar cells.  Rough Estimates for installed regular solar voltaic panels in Texas can give us a comparison. A best-case solar energy generation scenario (12,500 watt system) as calculated using the NREL PVWatts calculator, the system would cost around $42,000. On a strict power generation, cost comparison there is no competition.  Accounting for the cost of a new roof makes this better (as the Tesla installation is an entirely new roof). Using roofing installation costs as our guide a 3,215 sq foot roof would be around $30,000, which would make the Tesla premium around $13,000.  Bringing this to Canada, at this time Ontario accounts for 90% of solar electricity generation in Canada. This is primarily due to the provincial Feed In Tariff subsidy (FIT) which was introduced in 2009. With FIT, utilities have been required to purchase solar electricity at a price higher than that of retail rates (FIT rate in 2009: $0.80 per kWh, FIT rate in 2017: about $0.3per kWh). The contracts are for 20 years.  The Texas home in Ontario would generate income around US$2,800 per year (pre-tax). Enough to pay back the Tesla roof in about thirty years. With Teslas solar cells having a 30-year warranty, this essentially results in a free roof.   Although the above cost analysis is rough, the Tesla solar roof is unlikely to become the go-to solar product for most residential homeowners. However, in areas with high electricity prices and government subsidies, it is an attractive roofing option that can pay for itself.  What do you think? Do the Tesla roofs look like an option for you to offset some of your personal energy costs? 
In addition to supporting climate change mitigation, renewable energy can be used as a driving force to revitalize Indigenous and non-Indigenous rural communities across Canada. There is an untapped opportunity to leverage the build-out of the renewable energy sector to bring new jobs and economic development and to allow these communities to take an active role in the transition to the 21st century low-carbon economy.
Everyone wants the best for the environment but industrial-scale wind power development does not bring long-term employment to rural communities, nor broad economic development. It also does not appreciably benefit the environment. In Ontario, where wind power projects were forced on rural communities, the result has been social discord, multiple negative impacts from siting huge wind power generators too close to homes, and substantial negative impacts on Ontario as a whole as a result of premium contracts which have resulted in higher electricity bills for everyone, and advanced "energy poverty." Despite calls from two Auditors-General for thorough impact analysis, this has never been done. Ontario already had significant renewable energy but now has a surplus of intermittent, unreliable, expensive power. Beware blind ideology and "feel good" slogans: comprehensive independent cost-benefit analysis is necessary.
In the Yukon our communities want to develop local renewable energy to electrify the Alaska Highway and revitalize the highway lodges. Wind, solar, and micro-hydro will help to not only charge local and passing through EV's the wind energy can help to reduce heating oil because the wind blows harder in the winter, when it is cold. Electrical Thermal Storage units (ceramic bricks in insulated boxes) can be used to store wind energy. This is done in Alaska, Summerside PEI and North Dakota.
There should be absolutely no government subsidies to renewable energy projects. If you can make it work on that basis, terrific! Anything else is destructive to our economy.
By supporting Hemp Manufacturing it would provide thousands of jobs, save our trees and can be applied to many, many products thus reducing plastic waste.  Hemp cellulose can be extracted and used to make cellophane, rayon, celluloid and a range of related plastics. Hemp is known to contain around and is considered a good source (wood contains around 40%, flax 65-75%, and cotton up to 90%) that has particular promise due to its relative sustainability and low environmental impact.  Hempcrete can replace cement in building and construction.  It is a fibre reinforced lightweight concrete; hemp hurd and fiber, lime, sand, clay, 2% cement. Process: mixed and poured into forms, then plastered with our proprietary natural plaster and finally, coloured with mineral pigments. The bio-composite material stores energy quickly and then releases it in response to a rooms fluctuations in temperatures. The high-efficiency envelope thermal mass hemp walls breathe and regulate moisture  
  In any contaminated soil, hemp also actively absorbs heavy-metal contaminants from soil, gradually purifying the earth.  Building homes with hemp is one of the most promising applications of hemp. Theres several benefits that hempcrete offers. First, it acts an amazing thermodynamic insulator, so it helps to reduce the energy costs by 5070% annually for families (especially those in extremely cold or hot climates). Hempcrete is also great for those who are sensitive to allergies. Regular insulators and paint can be the prime source of allergies for many people, as these conventional materials can be toxic. Made with all natural material, can eliminate many different health problems. Hempcrete also continuously absorbs CO2 as it ages, so it reduces your carbon footprint. As it absorbs CO2, the material actually becomes stronger. Essentially, a building made with hempcrete will become stronger over time. When it comes to construction, hempcrete homes have zero construction waste. When you consider that 55% of the worlds energy consumption is construction-waste related, there are huge implications on reducing our carbon footprint. Other applications of hemp for homes are soundproof hemp walls and bash-proof hemp roofing.  Hemp fabric has proved to be superior to its counterparts in almost every way. Hemp fiber is more  Porous and breathable  Hemp fibers allow your skin to breathe. Durable  Hemp fiber is the most durable fiber of any plant. Eco-friendly & Sustainable  Cotton is a water-intensive crop and uses 25% of the worlds pesticides. Hemp requires 50% less water to grow than cotton and requires no use of pesticides.  In 1941, Henry Ford built a car out of hemp. It was not only built out of hemp plastic, but it also ran on hemp fuel. Hemp plastic was tested to be much stronger than steel. They tried denting the hemp car with a hammer, but the car didnt even budge. Hemp can be used as a biofuel. An acre of hemp can produce power equivalent to a thousand gallons of gasoline. Imagine the sustainability benefits that would bring. Hemp can be used for office supplies and chairs/desks. It is a great substitute for wood and paper.  Hemp could also replace plastic bags and plastic packaging. Currently, plastic waste is killing our wildlife and environment. 
For Canada to before a clean-energy, low carbon economy, nuclear energy must continue to be a part of our energy mix. Nuclear is a part of the climate change solution. Nuclear energy facilities are a low-carbon energy source, which means less air pollution and fewer greenhouse gases emitted.Nuclear is a sustainable and reliable base load energy source which will help to meetour growingelectricity demands. Renewable energy such as solar and wind are great options to add to our diverse energy portfolio, but are not enough to sustain our current and predicted energy demands. Nuclear energy is currently the only low-carbon option to fill this gap while new technologies are being developed.
provincial interties on electricity grid would allow prairie provinces to buy nuclear base load from ON shifted by a few hours, allowing faster amortization of nuclear facility upgrades in ON.
I think Nuclear is a great option, but we should move away from uranium as a fuel source and switch to a more abundant and stable fuel source such as thorium. There are many benefits of thorium over uranium, I posted about this previously.
Thorium is still too early, but tests in Netherlands just started this month, after 45 years https://articles.thmsr.nl/petten-has-started-world-s-first-thorium-msr-specific-irradiation-experiments-in-45-years-ff8351fce5d2 Uranium is so energy dense and so abundant, OK to use, we need to promote this project being done in China with Canadian CANDU reactors so that it will be fueled entirely byspent fuel from old light water reactors.http://www.world-nuclear-news.org/C-Canada-and-China-team-up-on-AFCR-2309164.html Also, we need to promote and support this supercluster for large innovation rewardhttps://cna.ca/news/canadian-nuclear-industry-signals-interest-supercluster-initiative/ Finally, watch this space of Canadian Nuclear Labs for the international interest in research of advanced reactors in Canadahttp://www.cnl.ca/en/home/news-and-publications/news-releases/2017/0817.aspx
Nuclear energy production is water consumptive. Water is wasted in uranium mining and milling, and is wasted in reactors. The waste produced in mining negatively impacts the environment and groundwater sources. This is an archaic technology and very expensive way to boil water. The expense of refurbishing or rebuilding reactors has a negative impact on the cost of using energy in Ontario. Get off nuclear and move to green technology. 
Nuclear power is too dangerous and too costly. Imagine a Fukushima sized catastrophe on our Great Lakes. Renewables are already lower cost, especially water power from QC which is a third the cost (5-6 centss /kwh) of rebuilding our aging nuclear reactors (OPG is asking for 16.5 before cost overruns to rebuild Darlington). ON bought wind at 8 cents last year, and solar at 15 cents. Prices for renewables are dropping while prices for nuclear are rising. And no long-lasting radioactive waste left for future generations to deal with, and no risk of catastrophic accidents.
nuclear energy is no different from any other thermal generation source in terms of requirement of a heat sink. This could be steam towers or direct cooling using a large body of water. Please also keep in mind that any technology has a mining requirement for raw materials, with attendant environmental impacts. To the contrary, this is where nuclear is superior because energy density means so much more energy can be gotten per unit fuel, about 50,000 to 1,000,000 more kWh / kg (depending on the technology). Moreover, power plants have huge power density advantage: fully 1/3 of all ON electricity comes from ONE nuclear facility (Bruce). If that were to come from wind, you would need quite literally 10,000 - 12,000 wind turbines plus means to store GW-days of electricity! Think of land use, steel/concrete, etc. for THAT, not to mention bird/bat kills. Nuclear energy is superior because it does the most with the least.
If we have any hope of averting serious climate change I believe we will need more nuclear power in the short term. Nuclear power technology has changed drastically and presents the best option to fill the gap if we are to get off fossil fuels. That is unless humans in the developed nations dramatically change their lifestyles and quite frankly I think the chances of this are extremely remote. 
nuclear energy is our second cheapest source of power after hydro. See Pg. 19 of Ontario Energy Board: Regulated Price Plan Price Report,https://www.oeb.ca/oeb/_Documents/EB-2004-0205/RPP_Price_Report_Nov2016.pdf The risk of a catastrophic accident is vastly overblown and is a product of decades of fearmongering over the slightest trace of radioactivity, even though we OURSELVES are radioactive (thanks to Potassium-40, Carbon-14, etc.) and we live on a radioactive planet (granite has anywhere from 10-100 PPM of naturally occurring radionuclides). We accept risks everyday of burning coal, and polluting with combustion engines, which kills people via premature deaths by the millions worldwide every year. Nuclear energy is statistically the safest form of large-scale energy production, with zero emissions.
One final thought: I have nothing against renewables. My only criticism is that they are variable and intermittent, AND there is no known means to store the required amount of electricity to fully balance this variability at grid scale. Even if we did, it would only serve to increase the cost much more, in terms of dollars and environmental impact (land use, materials consumed in the infrastructure). So, we can put them to work, but they are fundamentally limited in scope by the physics itself. The biggest danger is to delude ourselves by thinking they can do it all, we just have to build more. If this we true, I would support it - in fact I did until I saw the numbers and analyzed the facts. Renewables are a part of the answer, but they will only a small part. Nuclear's advantages, however, are supported by the physics and stand up to rigorous analysis. It must play a significant role in a decarbonized future.
France, Germany, Japan e t c our pushing nuclear energy out of the picture, as fast as they can. Considering that the very honorable Steven Harper ridiculed and fired our watchdog Linda Keen for asking for a reserve pump, exactly what would have saved Fukushima, we are even less able to avoid similar disaster in Canada.  Quebec has all of its energy from hydroelectricity, a DC +1100 and -1100 1100kv grid, as in China, could be used as a cheap battery for storing wind and solar energies. Other provinces could do the same with their existing and future hydroelectricity, in addition to limiting floods and irrigation Nuclear has the worst possibility to vary its production from all non-renewable sources.  Fukushima is does for centuries. Toronto is much more precious and we cannot afford to do the same.
Okay you're all touting nuclear energy as our saviour but what exactly are we doing with the inevitable radioactive waste that is being generated? Do you even realize how long the waste remains radioactive? We can't guarantee its safety for hundreds, let alone thousands, of years.
We should invest heavily in modular molten salt reactors. These can be developed and used domestically. They can be configured to burn various fissile materials including spent fuel from current reactors. These have the potential to be much safer and cost effective compared to the old style reactors which are inherently unstable. We should configure them so that the final products of the reaction are minimal and have a short half life. We should put money into Canadian companies to build them here. These are commercial units that plug in like a battery and are returned to the manufacturer for recycling once spent. Canada has abundant natural resources including uranium and thorium to provide abundant energy into the future. We should make use of it.
The idea is to create Aurora borealis cells for electricity like solar cells using conventional solar cells or more effective solar cells.
What does this mean? More info would be appreciated.
Some kind of a standard symbol / icon / trademark for packaging that would draw a green-consumer (willing to pay premium) to a box where the packager can explain how much more per package they had to pay for green vs commodity grid energy, ie lawn fertilizer done with wind energy electrolysis vs methane. With carbon pricing, its all supposed to be pricing signals. But until we get to 400$/tonne in 2050, there may be consumer interest in seeing some labeling, so they can voluntarily pay a bit more of not much difference.
When the furnace kicks in, or you turn on a light, ever wonder how much more CO2 that's pumping out? If there were standards applied to natgas and electricity providers, that they must have sensor connectors that can be read, exposed inside each building on utility wall, then wall thermostat installers can hook up and show you in real-time (and cumulatively)
I think there would need to be an internetinformation line forelectricity, to say thecarbon content of electricity you're receiving in real-time, which may change during the day.
And for electricity, seeing carbon content in real time, consumers could 'load shed' laundry and baking when wind not blowing / sun not shining / carbon content high.
I think this is a great idea! If we charge everyone the same for carbon price, even if some use more, and others use less makes no sense. If we charged people based on how much they use that would force people to be more careful on how much CO2 emissions the put out I think.
If I cared about the carbon content of my energy then I guess this might be useful. But I really don't. I care about cost. And this, along with all the goofy renewables is only going to add to the cost of electricity.
The controversy that erupted following Jacobson et al 2015 paper on the 100% WWS solution highlighted problems of load balancing and grid stability with no "controllable" resource other than hydro in dams and uncertainties re adequacy of transmission from dams far from loads. Distributed natural gas turbine plants seem to be the way we're going but they emit too much CO2. They could be fitted with Carbon Capture and Storage; but current methods give the operators the additional task of operating a chemical plant on the back-end and I'm not sure how unwieldy that would be for peaking operations. What about firing with oxygen instead of air? This would produce off-gas with just water vapour that can be easily condensed and CO2 that just has to be compressed. A lot easier and more maneuverable for the operators I imagine. INCO did this for years to make capture of SO2 easier. Investment in storage bullets and over-sizing air-separation plant to work off-peak could also contribute to energy storage problem.  
How would oxygen be captured or generated? That could be expensive. If there was enough fertilizer ammonia production hydrogen source switched from methane CH4 to electrolysis of water H2O, then O2 would be free there. If you store the CO2 and split it into carbon and O2 in the summer using solar energy, then you could recycle the O2.
People can view the study, and responses, referred to that shows it's possible to have a stable grid and provide 100% clean and renewable energy for all purposes at low cost: https://web.stanford.edu/group/efmh/jacobson/Articles/I/CombiningRenew/combining.html As is evident from the paper, there are many controllable options, aside from hydroelectric. They didn't even need grid-scale batteries, tech like Hydrostor's terrestrial compressed air energy storage that could be 
Anonymous's link is Jacobsons side. Clack effectively rebutted Jacobsons reply to him: ww.vibrantcleanenergy.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/ReplyResponse.pdf The assertion that only hydro is controllable is simply untrue can be assessed by reviewing a huge error made by Jacobson. His supply mix called on 1,300 GW of hydro power for a 9 hour period and over 700 GW for other periods, whereas the total installed capacity of hydro in the US is only about 90 GW, (half in the 3 west coast states). When called out on this, Jacobsoningenuously claimed it was "instantaneous power" (for 9 hours), he'd just forgot to add the cost of the extra turbines, with no notion of the practicality of adding of 14 times more turbine capacity (civil, electrical) to every hydro dam. For flexibility of heating loads, he relies on underground thermal storage based on 1 small prototype in Alberta costing $135,000 per home. Yet he claims no economic factors impede his vision. Seriously?
I agree that Jacobson's plan is not realistic. What might make more sense is to convert fossil fuels into hydrogen and then capture the carbon?This way the capital-intensive capture and storage equipment could be used more intensively and efficiently.
You need to consider the big picture from mining uranium to transportation to refining to building a nuclear reactor, to decommissioning a nuclear reactor to storing the waste. When this is considered, nuclear power is not green and is very expensive. when you look at risk, you look at frequency which for nuclear power is low, every 15 years but also the consequences which are enormous and long lived. Only government, i.e. we tax payers are picking up the liability. 
Actually, research has been conducted that shows that uranium, from cradle to grave, has a lower carbon footprint than most other electricity sources (http://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/acs.est.5b06072; http://www.fedorukcentre.ca/news/news-releases/nr20160908-u_minining_lca.php). Many people forget that windmills and solar panels are made up of resources that have to be mined as well, and they also have to be disposed of at end of life. Solar panels are not sustainable produced at the moment. Nuclear is a reliable, low carbon energy source that we need right now. We need to educate people on our electricity needs and sources so they can make educated decisions, and not rely on fear based decisions that they have not researched.
 France, the champion of nuclear energy, is phasing it out. Germany is pushing it out of the picture even faster.  Canada should do it immediately, especially since Linda Keen, our watchdog, was ridiculed publicly and fired from her job by the very honorable Steven Harper.
Great Idea, this will surely bring investments in renewable energy to Canada in a big way!
There are over 292 communities in Canada that depend on the supply of diesel fuel to support their total energy needs. These practices are both unsustainable and prohibitively expensive. Our Research shows that the arctic hashigh levelsof Global Horizontal Irradiation during summer months, making solar economically feasible when panels can follow the sun. Morgan Solar, a Canadian company, manufactures a rapidly deployable easy to install dual-axis tracker. With Battery Storage, we could supply>%50 of a communities electricity demand from solar energy. 
 Good idea, worth studying and testing, in association with wind power and hydraulic energies.
Agree it's important for remote communities to become more self-sufficient and resilient from sustainable energy.
If it was unsustainable and prohibitively expensive then why are they still doing it after 50+ years?  Battery storage and solar panels in Canada's north - that is the definition of prohibitively expensive.  These solar projects (without the cost of batteries!) never payout. The solar panels actually don;'t last long enough to get a return on investment. Just take a look at recent news releases where the government is funding these solar installations in the North. Ridiculous!
I agree there are some challenges that need to be solved with solar projects. It is however, astonishingly true that a single Canadian Solar 300W panel on your roof can make (40V at 8A) day after day with no noise and no moving parts, at a price of $1 per Watt. Add some ultracapacitors (1,000,000 charge cycles) which are nearly immune to cold temperatures and LED bulbs and you have a long term, low maintenance civic illumination system for our cities in the far north. It's definitely not ridiculous, see for example, Seoul, South Korea - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=deXK_qs-f4w&t=48s
Tesla's batteries are not really suitable for off grid northern climates, they need to be kept heated indoors and mPower says they need to be grid tied. I think NorthVolt, and Electrovya have the right ideas, developing storage and batteries for northern Climates. And Electrodacus has an amazing small scale solar-wind-thermal storage system that does not really need batteries. For the north, tracking solar should be great for the endless summer, winter - that's another matter. Small scale wind, or for communities with mines or old boreholes -geothermal may be worth a look.
1.I am 100% in favor of a national revenue neutral carbon tax and dividend as promoted by the Citizens' Climate Lobby for the last ten years. 2. Education: The Liberal federal government needs to explain why it is necessary to continue to generously subsidize the oil and gas industry as well as support new pipelines while simultaneously encouraging the Canada and world-wide transition to clean energy. Please explain how the former strategies are supportive of the latter, especially in the context of our climate crisis. 3. We need to develop a clean energy electricity grid from coast to coast to coast that would be married to the existing grid for times when there is not enough electricity generated by clean sources such as sun, wind and nuclear. 4. I live in Northern Ontario but must travel to Ottawa often. I wanted to purchase an electric car this year but had to settle for a hybrid as there are no charging stations between my home and my destination. We need more charging stations between all places in the North and the rest of the province of Ontario and throughout Canada.      
Merci pour votre commentaire sur l'exploitation de biomasse forestire. Nous sommes d'accord que la biomasseforestire est une sourced'nergiemergeant avec nombreaux des avantages associs. Le saviez-vous que CanmetENERGY a une groupe qui travail sur lessystmes de bionergie avec les universits et l'industrie? Ce groupe recherches la ncessit d'une communaut de biomasse et fournir des informations sur le sujet. Si vous voulez d'autre information sur le sujet, cliquez ici 

Cmon folks, make this a reality.
Sorry I do not understand what is this post all about. please explain
we need more funding for 3DPrinting for individuals & groups including through welfare, tax credits , & start to require provinces & territories to require it to be covered on computer bursariesas you would laptops, from grade school all the way up to college Require provinces & territories to put 3DPrinting & Cad design into the curriculum this will also allow more talent development & productivity into students & will get kids to be more interested in subjects where otherwise is harder to get younger kids into like mathAlso according to studies 3DPrinting can reduce pollution by 20% thats 1/5 of pollution second 3DPrinting can reduced wasted resources asunlike most processes it does not need 100% materialthird we need more 3DPrinting to be required in contructionwith recycled cement & concrete & it really adds up even 1 demolition of a multi level building is still bad enough for the enviroment think of all these put together & instead of wasting this cement & concrete from each building that is torn down & we can reuse those resources thats huge
Existing housing stock is woefully energy inefficient and new buildings are not as efficient as they could be. We know how to do it but the effort needs to be supported. Government needs to realize the most effective methods do not involve fossil fuels and are not entirely dependent on renewables. Conservation of energy is possible and achievable.
Thanks for your suggestion! NRCan has many programs to help support organizations that are constructing or retrofitting buildings. Check themout and tell us if there's anything more we can add.

Im surprised the Hydrogen Economy has not been mentioned, or a hydrogen tag created (Please create one). Many think tanks around the world recognize this as an important part of the future, especially as a transitionary technology, which we need the most right now.  Hydrogen is probably the most versatile form of energy. Think of it as battery in gas form. It can be combusted for thermal energy, but is much more effective when converted to electricity and water (with oxygen) in a fuel cell. Lithium batteries have a far better in/out efficiency, but are limited in capacity and will have difficulty meeting large scale applications. Hydrogen is probably the only viable green alternative to meeting the massive energy requirements of trains, trucks, marine vessels, and heavy machinery that must operate off the grid.  The problem is hydrogen is dangerous. Hydrogen is the smallest molecule that exists, so leaks can be a problem. It also has a wide explosive range and is extremely flammable. On the positive side, due to the low density it dissipates quickly by floating up and away, preventing accumulation at ground level. Car manufacturers like Honda and GM are still developing fuel cell cars, but at this point lithium batteries are probably the better choice for small applications. We would need to develop fool proof equipment and processes for general public use.  Hydrogen can be stored in vessels, but to truly be successful, we need to develop large scale storage. This will allow a buffer between supply and demand. Similar to Natural Gas, it can be stored underground in large salt caverns. Either build new ones or repurpose an existing cavern for hydrogen.  Lets be pragmatic and pilot the large capacity users mentioned above. It is a smaller group that can be regulated more effectively. Work with the TSSA and CSA to develop proper training and processes. Risks can be managed, we all do it every day when you drive your car or cross the road. Maybe one day it will be expanded to automotive sector.  There are many ways to build on the hydrogen economy, but we need to get started.
Canada actually has a quite a bit of hydrogen research on the West Coast. Ballard has been operating facilities to make fuel cells since the 90's and the Daimler-Ford fuel cell venture (AFCC) has been here since 2008. There are a number of small spin-offs and a lot of know-how hanging around Metro Vancouver. If there was a push to build the infrastructure, we have the engineering knowledge in place already.
In the absence of lithium ion batteries, hydrogen would be an important energy carrier. It's round trip inefficiency (electricity to hydrogen to electricity), storage difficulties and lack of existing infrastructure make it an inferior alternative to electricity for use in general automotive applications, although it will be able to play a significant role in certain niche applications.
Scotland has already started... http://www.bbc.com/news/uk-scotland-scotland-business-41257407
Critical to the future of the chemicals industry
As you may know Powertech Labs in Surrey is continuing the research on hydrogen cars and there are several of those running in Vancouver streets taking fuel from a couple of hydrogen stations.
It's important to avoid the tendency to pit one form of energy improvement against another, i.e., I think that the future of transport will not be either battery power or hydrogen fuel cell-based, but a combination of both. For vehicles that require frequent duty with short down time, e.g., city buses and heavy trucks on trunking operations, fuel cell approaches would seem to be more useful than batteries. For cars that will spend most of their life in an urban environment, batteries seem logical.  For city buses, predictable routing around close proximity to a refuelling base lends itself to relatively easy installation of the required infrastructure at a central hub. For heavy trucks, it seems that the size of the battery required for an electric vehicle would be prohibitively costly in terms of payload.
If genuinely renewable energy is used for the hydrolysis, e.g., solar, wind, and wave power, then hydrogen fuel use really does seem to offer the cleanest and most sustainable approach for the future.  As for hydrogen being dangerous and explosive, so is gasoline, yet we have that transported everywhere now and in a tank in our vehicles. Therefore, similar safeguard-based approaches to hydrogen would apply and be acceptable.  The technology exists, reliability is proven (Ballard buses in London) fuel cells are getting cheaper (ITM Power), and the heavy truck industry is trialling fuel cells (Scania working with Hydrogenics). The infrastructure is needed for our future, but must be planned. Shell is already active in this area. Like the first gasoline vehicles, there was no network of fuel stations when they first arrived, so theres no reason why we cant make this happen.  And yes, please add a hydrogen tag!
I wonder if Hydrogen could ever be used -the way propane is used for residential rural heating in storage tanks?I rather like the idea of instead of dumping surplus electricity at a loss - using it when available to crack and store hydrogen. (Ontario Hydro One dumped $6bn of electricity in 2016.)
"A climate solution where all sides can win."Ted Halstead's TED talk is a compelling argument for market-friendly "carbon dividends". The proposal returns the money collected in carbon taxes directly to citizens, offsetting the added costs. Canada should do this! The web site for this idea is here: https://www.clcouncil.org/The compelling TED talk (including a written transcript) is here: https://www.ted.com/talks/ted_halstead_a_climate_solution_where_all_sides_can_win A PDF summary is attached and available here: https://clcouncil.org/TheConservativeCaseforCarbonDividends.pdf

Thank you for that great suggestion! Check out some oftheprojects for energy usehere and here, and let us knowif they would be viable sites for tours.
I would be glad to pay for such educational site tours, but I don't think people should be forced to pay, as long as they inform the site owners in advance of when they plan on showing up for a visit. I realize that security/safety is the big concern here, because site owners do not usually like to get all kind she of visitors. This is why I suggested that only some sites be picked carefully and that the owners should be subsidized to make the necessary site additions t receive visitors and hire more employees.
A ground-source heat pump produces 25,600 kWh a year of renewable energy from the ground, to meet space heating, water heating and space cooling demand in the average household across Canada (NRCan-OEE data). To produce this dispatchable energy, the heat pump requires 7,800 kWh of electricity. Add the 4,900 kWh consumed for appliances + lights, and theTOTAL household consumption of 12,700 kWh over the year is dwarfed by the production of 25,600 ... double the production vs the consumption. This makes the unit NetZeroPlus. Assuming the power supply is carbon-free, the house is zero carbon. The house can also be programmed to only run the heat pump in off-peak TOU periods, to save money and reduce peak demand on theLDC. A short video at http://NetZero.cf Details at http://NetZeroPlus.ca and http://NZx2.com. I renovated my personal home into the top-20 energy retrofits in Canada by installing the system; details at http://my-green-home.ca CI buildings require more plug load forcomputers, lights, etc, but can easily become a NetZeroPlus building if they follow the concept. Residential + commercial buildings in Canada consume 550 billion kWh a year for space heating, water heating, space cooling (http://oee.nrcan.gc.ca/corporate/statistics/neud/dpa/menus/trends/comprehensive_tables/list.cfm). THIS is the target for NetZeroPlus.
Generating most of your heating and cooling from the earth adjacent to your home or business is by far the most efficient method of heating and cooling a home. It reduces the amount of energy needed from outside of your property making your building more self sufficient and less reliant on other fuels.
"The collective potential of residential DR across Canada from space and water heating end-uses alone was estimated to be 39 GW/85 GWh, the size of Qubecs winter peak demand for 2 hours." - Stephen Wong, PhD, CanmetENERGY, "Summary Report on Canadian Residential Demand Response and Ancillary Service Market Opportunities" What this quote implies, is that enabling control over electric water heaters, thermostat or EV chargers (not included in this evaluation) would allow provincial grids to mitigate peak demand, where electricity demand is above the power being generated, meaning utilities rely on gas-fired, or worse diesel-fired, generators to compensate demand. This kind of peak generation is extremely costly (try 2500% more costly, yes, thousand) and bears a heavy cost in carbon footprint as it typically always rely on fossil fueled power generation. Renewables are great, but they provide energy, not power. This means that while they greatly contribute to the grid, they cannot be leveraged at will when demand increases beyond normal levels, say when temperatures dips way below zero. IoT enables control in a secure and extremely cost-efficient manner, all the while providing the homeowner with a much clearer understanding of their energy use. But this is only true if such devices are not cheap consumer electronics made overseas, with no oversight on security, privacy, efficiency and most importantly, the end-user's comfort and well-being. Since Canada is leading in smart grid and DR research and commercialization, it would be only fitting it is the one to lead the way to proper standardization and certification of domestic equipment meant for integration with the utility power grid. Companies like CaSA and Giant manufacture DR-ready consumer products 100% made in Canada.
Demand response, especially that enabled by online intelligent charging and vehicle to grid technologies, are critically important, and are areas in which Canadian businesses are well positioned to create prosperity.
Indeed. But EVs are the next thing, not the current thing. What's interesting in DWH and residential heat DR is that's it's already available: it just needs to be enabled. Capex for residential DR in this day and age is a fraction of what it was even 5 years ago, meaning that a big part of thermal storage needed for peak demand and power management is a few bucks away. EV integration offers the opportunity of doing right the first time, instead of having to go back and fix load control once EV is mainstream.
I think this is a wonderful idea! You might want to check out what Summerside Power is doing in PEI. It is not this complex but it is a similar idea.
Hydrogen can replace fossil fuels in both transportation and industrial applications. Hydrogen can be blended with natural gas and can be used in natural gas-applications. This issue will reduce the emission associated with using natural gas. Hydrogen can also be used in hydrogen vehicles that are run by hydrogen instead of gasoline. |Hydrogen can also give us the option to store large amount of energy for long duration of time. the idea is to use surplus renewable electricity to produce hydrogen and then to store hydrogen underground. this hydrogen can be later used (industry or transport). By this method we are not only increasing the share of renewable energy in the total energy system, but we are also using surplus renewable electricity.
I think there are two places where hydrogen is really going to shine - in the reduction of emissions associated with long distance trucking and with storage of energy produced in more remote areas. Large trucks probably can't reasonably use Li batteries, so building H2 infrastructure on main trucking routes is a good idea. And for storage, hydrogen allows us to build windfarms and other electrical generation systems in places with low population. This energy can be stored and transported without the need to building large transmission lines as a requirement for any such project.
Idiotic idea, hydrogen vehicles are only 19% to 23% efficiency. What an incredible waste of energy produced at a huge capital cost (of course subsidized by our tax dollars). It would be absolutely stupid to do what you are suggesting.
It's important to avoid the tendency to pit one form of energy improvement against another, i.e., I think that the future of transport will not be either battery power or hydrogen fuel cell-based, but a combination of both. For vehicles that require frequent duty with short down time, e.g., city buses and heavy trucks on trunking operations, fuel cell approaches would seem to be more useful than batteries. For cars that will spend most of their life in an urban environment, batteries seem logical.  For city buses, predictable routing around close proximity to a refuelling base lends itself to relatively easy installation of the required infrastructure at a central hub. For heavy trucks, it seems that the size of the battery required for an electric vehicle would be prohibitively costly in terms of payload.
If genuinely renewable energy is used for the hydrolysis, e.g., solar, wind, and wave power, then hydrogen fuel use really does seem to offer the cleanest and most sustainable approach for the future.  As for hydrogen being dangerous and explosive, so is gasoline, yet we have that transported everywhere now and in a tank in our vehicles. Therefore, similar safeguard-based approaches to hydrogen would apply and be acceptable.  The technology exists, reliability is proven (Ballard buses in London) fuel cells are getting cheaper (ITM Power), and the heavy truck industry is trialling fuel cells (Scania working with Hydrogenics). The infrastructure is needed for our future, but must be planned. Shell is already active in this area. Like the first gasoline vehicles, there was no network of fuel stations when they first arrived, so theres no reason why we cant make this happen.  Please add a hydrogen tag!
community lead IPP coops selling to utillity crown corporations. Indiginious owned IPP respecting treaties and or land claims to bring economy into poor communities. For uban areas, find ways to switch to clean energy without making it too big where enviroment is effected too much. Small scale with little foot print. Goverments subidizing the pre-feasabillity stage and giving out loans for construction phases. Banks can lower interest for loans related to clean energy projects.
Thank you for that great suggestion! Check out some of these community based projects for solar and geothermalthat are currently in place. Let us know if they fit into what you are looking for community lead, small scale projects.
My understanding is that this forum is for generating/supporting ideas on "How do we meet Canadas climate goals, create jobs, and keep energy affordable" not fora business calls. Correct me if I am wrong. Andrew made a very important point in how the community energy systems, Microgrids, Virtual Power Plants (VPPs) and prosumers (producers nd consumers) will play a role in the futer energy systems. It is where the effort should be focused on and yes the Conversation Catalystand alike may be part of this transformation. The question is how are we going to do that. We need utility regulations, governments programs and financial support (incentives, low interest lawns, support for pilot projects).
The Ontario Society of Professional Engineers energy task force is proposing an interruptible retail electricity market for surplus clean electricity. That interruptible electricity would be available at only its wholesale market price which is typically less than 1 cent/kWh or less than half the price of natural gas on an energy equivalent basis. This will allow consumers to switch from fossil fuel for space and water heating to clean electricity economically when there is a surplus of clean electricity. Fuel switching technology is far cheaper than electrical storage technology so we can economically use that surplus clean electricity in Canada rather than curtail it or export it at low market prices. Clean electrical power grids inherently have periods of surplus clean electricity which can be used to reduce fossil fuel consumption if the retail electricity price plans are designed to utilize surplus clean electricity for that purpose.
I can echo this need and would further add that this type of market mechanism exists in American Electricity markets. Empowering consumers with choice on their supply mix will engender consumers with an awareness that will help bridge the energy literacy chasim that hinders climate change impact initiatives.
Thanks for your comment. Very few people realize that the full retail price for electricity for most residential consumers is currently more than 5x the price of natural gas at the home. Consequently simply switching from natural gas to normal uninterruptible electricity for their thermal energy needs is very expensive. However interruptible clean surplus electricity is available on the wholesale market in Ontario at less than 1 cent/kWh or less than 1/2 the price of natural gas. Since interruptible electricitydemandimposes no additional capacity or system reserve burden on the power grid it can be legitimately sold to retail customers at that wholesale price as long as it can be interrupted when the surplus disappears. We have already reduced emissions in the electricity sector by 80% from 1990 levels. Our next phase of carbon emission reductions is the other sectors of the economy. Ontario can be first to start that process using its clean electrical system.
It is 1 cent because there isn't much access to the market today. Once there is enough demand, than the price goes up. The economics to substitute natural gas on off peak might work for a little while. It is a balancing act and you to keep a close eye on price. The good times would not last long. I agree with the concept but focus on better uses of the energy.
As soon as the gas price starts growing battery energy storage systems (BESS) will replace gas picker plants. With system size battery price going down fast and capacity going up (ex flow batteries) it is not a question IF but rather WHEN.
My husband is a Doctor of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences and he and a handful of scientist-engineers have discovered that the wind energy follows the heating load. In Alaska they are using Electrical Thermal Storage (ETS) Units to store the heat in times when the wind is not blowing. ETS units are simply an insulated box with iron ceramic bricks that can be heated to 700oC and the units can also be programmed to re-charge every 18 hours. The ETS are set up to be controlled by the utilities and they can use them to shave peaks, store wind and reduce fuel oil. Indigenous Development corporations should own and operate these systems like it is done in Alaska with the Chaninik Village Wind Group.
Elecrodacus has developed a small scale wind-solar-thermal storage system - that does not need batteries. Uses barrels of water+glycol for storage. http://electrodacus.com/DMPPT450/dmppt-presentation-v01.pdf 
Industry experts and market forces are projecting a surprisingly rapid transition from the use of oil to the use of electricity as the principal transportation fuel. Leading researchers and commentators who are making such forecasts include: Professor Tony Seba of Stanford University: https://tonyseba.com/portfolio-item/clean-disruption-of-energy-and-transportation/ Michael Liebreich of Bloomberg New Energy: https://about.bnef.com/blog/liebreich-state-industry-keynote-bnef-global-summit-2017/ Professor Ramez Naam of Singularity University: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6eOFokM3lUI The reasons that electricity will rapidly replace oil as the principal transportation fuel include:  The second law of thermodynamics, which limits all heat engines to the theoretical Carnot efficiency (and which means that gasoline and diesel engines will never be even one third as efficient as electric motors). The continually falling costs of batteries (down 80% in the last six years, with the rate of decline accelerating due to greater research and production volumes). The inherent advantages of electric drive trains, including 400% greater efficiency, 99% fewer moving parts, 90% less maintenance, less vibration, higher performance and more usable power delivery, less noise, greatly reduced emissions and environmental impacts, and more convenience for most consumer automotive applications (the electric fuel tank is full every morning). The worlds largest markets for new cars (including China, India, and European countries) are mandating the transition from gasoline and diesel vehicles. 
And the idea is ...? I guess to promote and use EVs! For China and India the big issue is still to comply with the Kioto and Paris Agreements. Hope Canada will not withdraw from Paris Agreement as we did withdraw from the Kioto Agreement.
Thanks for your suggestion and the information about the transition to EVs. Were also working on having funding available to help organizations and communities with the costs of their alternative fuel infrastructure. The Electric Vehicle and Alternative Fuel Infrastructure Deployment Initiative aims to increase the awareness and use of lower carbon vehicles and fuels in Canada.
How will an electric vehicle keep the driver warm in northern climates when it is minus 40 degrees? The "inefficient" gasoline engine provides heat as a by-product.
Electric vehicles need power generation by oil and nuclear. Think about that.
Leading research recommends using a belt and suspenders approach to climate legislation that combines a national carbon tax and also laws and regulations to require emissions reductions, particularly in key areas like transportation and energy generation.  The nation-wide carbon price floor will be only $10 in 2018, increasing to $50 per ton of CO2e by 2022. This is predicted to not be enough on its own to meet our Paris Climate Accord commitments (greenhouse-gas emissions reduced by 30 per cent below 2005 levels by 2030). The federal government should rapidly implement ambitious regulations to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. This will be the most effective way to make up for our insufficient carbon price between now and 2022.
Great idea- let's kill off every industry in the country so we can all go back to living in caves. Everyone should be happy with that.
Maybe not that far back but just to the horse era :) ... however, exploitation of animals may not be acceptable today
Increase the scope of the national carbon price to include all greenhouse gas emissions that can be accurately measured. This includes non-combustion sources of carbon dioxide and other powerful greenhouse gases like methane. Polluting industries should pay their fair share when they emit greenhouse gases regardless of how those emissions are produced. Self-monitoring and reporting by industry sectors with significant fugitive methane emissions or process emissions is not sufficient. (These sectors include natural gas production, agriculture, coal mining, cement, and metal production.)
Apply a carbon levy on imports where the carbon price applied by the exporting country does not meet or exceed Canadas domestic carbon price. This will prevent domestic production and consumption from being undercut by goods produced in jurisdictions with weaker climate policy. The Government of Canada can act now to add carbon levy mechanisms into the renegotiated NAFTA, and work on the international stage to add carbon levy mechanisms to all trade deals or treaties that deal with international transportation.
Do you sit back... read and think about what you write ? This is an excellent way to destroy Canadian trade with the world. This country is not anexperimental Lab to test your pet theories.
All federal infrastructure spending, including joint funding with provinces, territories and municipalities, should be screened and prioritized according to transparent and comprehensive environmental criteria, particularly GHG reduction commitments. Significant economic stimulus is needed to create a new type of economy that provides jobs in an equitable manner while moving away from fossil fuels, but in situations where economic stimulus and decarbonization come into conflict, decarbonization should be the top priority.
Federal investments in transportation should be re-planned to meet long-term mobility needs with a minimum of energy. Areas in need of federal leadership include:  Begin planning for a peak and then long-term gradual decline of road and air travel. This means stopping all expansions of federally controlled highways and airports, and withholding federal funds from highway and airport expansions controlled by provinces or territories.  Also plan for modality shifts towards active transport (e.g. walking, cycling), public transit, electric road vehicle, and electric high speed rail. Reallocate highway and airport expansion budgets to active transport infrastructure, public transit, electric road vehicle infrastructure, and electric high speed rail. Revise infrastructure planning to account for transportation as a service (TaaS) and autonomous vehicles. Increase fees on transportation fossil fuels and road user fees for long-haul freight.  Begin planning and provincial coordination for electrification of freight transport. Stop all expansions of fossil fuel transportation infrastructure (e.g. oil pipelines), and begin planning for a peak and then gradual decline of transportation of fossil fuels. Sign binding treaties with other countries to reduce emissions from international air and sea travel.  
This is an impractical idea. It in no way takes into consideration the realities of today's life and assumes a much quicker technological shift than I see happening.
It's fine we can still start at the city and province level. City of Vancouver and City of Victoria are in the process of completely converting to electric buses and more will follow suite.
Lets not push into ridiculous extremes. Gradual decline of road and air travel  stopping all expansions of federally controlled highways and airports. It would be really hard to cycle to Europe without a plain. Skytrain in Vancouver is a fantastic idea that changed the philosophy of public transportation and a great example to follow by other big agglomerations. However, we need roads and airports to get BC fruits from interiors, vegies from California in the winter time, Argentinian wines on our tables and go for decent vacations in Mexico or Europe. We need to change curriers into no GHG emission and energy efficient ones but we still need them. Elon Musk and alike will revolutionize the fast train transportation, future roads may not need asphalt from the oil, plain may not need conventional fuel  all of this is possible if we open the doors for innovation not elimination. Private not federal investments in transportation will meet long-term mobility 
Tak a look at map of Canada. See all that empty space? Your ideas are incredibly impractical. Apparently, you are assuming we all live in Vancouver.
Don't invest too fast, technologies will be used in the next 50 years that we haven't even discovered or thought possible yet. Invest in our medical and education and infra structure. The transportation sector will move much slower. Self driving cars will eliminate 1/2 the cars on the road today. Then we will be demolishing roads making room for residential.
Immediately end all subsidies to the fossil industries including tax deductions such as the Accelerated Capital-Cost Writeoffs, and the Canadian Development Expenses.
Sounds good- I'm assuming that your plan will also eliminate subsidies for solar, wind and other renewables that cannot compete withoutsubsidies
Subsidies for solar, wind and other renewables are needed in transition to boost the green industry but yes ultimately the subsidies should be eliminated to allow free competition in the market. We all pay for the consequences of GHG emission (health, climate change, environment) thus short-term incentives are justified. It's our tax money well spend if it is done right. BC, Alberta and other provinces pay for replacement of household equipment (light fixtures, fridges, stoves) into more energy efficient ones. Is it justifiable? I think yes because of GHG emission reduction (health, environment) and hopefully rate reduction through lowering the energy consumption (less generation, less transmission). 
Wes... Where does Alberta pay for replacement of household equipment? Are you referring to the LED bulb replacement?
Subsidies to auto manufacturers should also be stopped. Feds just recently supported a large engine plant in Ontario.
Being able to write off expenses is hardly a subsidy.
Regulations for buildings are mostly provincial, territorial and municipal jurisdiction, but federal government leadership is needed. Bring all the players together from across the country and support a coordinated transition to deep green building construction and retrofits. Build consensus around ambitious intermediate targets:  All new buildings constructed in Canada after 2030 to consume net zero energy (on an annual basis). All existing buildings to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 50% by 2030 (relative to 2015).   Support from the Federal government should include:  Research, development, and drafting of cutting-edge model building codes (for example updating the National Energy Code of Canada for Buildings) Support the local authority having jurisdiction with code compliance enforcement International coordination of building materials efficiency standards Fund labour force training in deep green building techniques Fund incentives for building energy efficiency Support public energy utilities to provide on-bill financing for building retrofits  Support municipalities to provide property-tax financing for building retrofits  
Given Canada's climate and the impact of climate change on the future need of more buildings needing to cool space, the need for efficient building envelopes is important. 
As we electrify transportation and heating, we will need more electricity supply. This supply should be met by decentralized renewable energy generation with the least environmental impact. This means energy is generated close to where it is consumed, and we only add more supply incrementally as we need it. Regulations for energy are mostly provincial jurisdiction, but federal government leadership is needed. Bring all the players together from across the country and coordinate local support for new decentralized renewable energy generation. Support from the federal government should include:  Increase federal funding to support provincial feed-in-tariff programs Fund smart grid energy system improvements Research, development, and drafting of model regulations for decentralized renewable energy generation, exchange and storage (such as easements on renewable energy procurement) Support non-profit neighbourhood energy utilities  Research new technology that enable automated demand-side management and energy exchange between energy consumers that are also producers 
Yes, more consumer-producer relationships need to be supported, particularly when you factor in various new energy harvesting technologies, like wireless power transfer. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I1IDC8FEIBU&feature=youtu.be&t=6m46s
Regulation for operation of Microgrids, Virtual Power Plants (VPPs) and prosumers (energy consumers and producers in one) are needed ASAP.
Who pays for your absurd scheme - the Carbon Tax ? 
https://www.generationenergy.ca/ideas/detail/628?layout=1page
Well, if planned correctly it would be net-zero. It is about how you build the smart grid. I suggested seed funding for Energy Coops as a means of helping individual groups or member driven organizations to start to invest in local energy initiatives that can feed into the larger grid but can also act as a microgrid. The logic is that you can design a program that provides x amount of dollars to a group that can demonstrate certain capacity. It can be a grant or short term business loan that will have to be repaid. The profits and yes a business plan would have to be submitted by the Energy Coop to show how they will become sustainable after a period of time. In addition, Coops require that each member has to invest their own money and time as well. Energy Coops can also be flexible and move into different power generation income streams. Think of starting with a Wind Farm move to biomass move to quick charge stations and onward.
We need to make our existing buildings more energy efficient. The first step is measuring how much energy they currently use. That data will help us triage the least efficient buildings and learn what renovations are the most effective. The Provinces have already committed to energy benchmarking for larger buildings as part of the Pan-Canadian Framework on Climate Change and Growth. The federal government can support the provinces accelerate this in many ways:  Convene provinces and territories to coordinate national standards for reporting building energy consumption. Encourage adoption of single a standardized benchmarking tool that can automatically receive updates from local energy utilities (e.g. Energy Star Portfolio Manager).  Fund and provide ongoing support for operation of a national database to collect all the data. Establish a timeline for provinces to mandate building energy consumption reporting. A phased approach should be adopted and we recommend requiring all public, commercial, and industrial buildings to report by 2020. Require all buildings to report by 2025. Fund increase building auditing capacity to verify energy reporting.   The federal government should publish this national inventory of building energy consumption in a machine-readable format. Analysis of the national inventory of building energy consumption will help identify the best opportunities for efficiency gains.
We already have the means of testing buildings and homes for energy efficiency what we need is a government policy with some teeth in it to mandate that ALL builders must implement the technology into any new build construction of housing or business towers or townhouses ,another area is new construction of grocery stores where it would be mandatory that HRV systems and building Dehumidification systems be installed ,the energy savings would be in the neighbourhood of 30 to 50 percent on refrigeration alone and with the implementation of co 2 refrigerants more savings can be realized ,forty plus years of experience makes me qualified to comment on this 
Use that ripoff Carbon Tax to fund this
We currently have insufficient data on how much methane is vented into the atmosphere in Canada. Technology exists that would help with the monitoring (e.g. high or low altitude remote sensing). The Federal Government should support improved monitoring of methane vented from industry, agriculture, and decomposing organic matter. Self-monitoring and reporting by industry sectors with significant fugitive methane emissions is not sufficient.
One volcanic event emits more methane and numerous other nasty things equal to the total North American output for many years 
Implement regulations for all large point-source emitters of greenhouse gases (GHGs). Require GHG emissions to decline to zero over a set schedule, based on meeting Canadas national GHG reduction obligations.
Why would they need to decline to ZERO- is that our new Paris target?  I thought it was 523 MT/year? Or you are suggesting that we shut down Canada which as we all know would do nothing to impact global GHG emissions.
Yah, the goals should be realistic. There are things we can change but often unable to stop. It may be funny to give this example but how can you stop cows producing methane?
A rather simplistic view of the world. It is comments like these from our environmental friends which show a total lack of understanding on how the economy, their lives, the health care system, the educational system,etc all operate. The unicorn and butterfly comments need to be explained by the Federal Government. Does the Canadian Government have no responsibility in educating Canadians on how the economy functions, and the massive social benefits of being in a resource rich country?
Create a zero emission vehicle (ZEV) sales mandate that requires 10% of new sales by 2020 and 70% of new sales by 2030 to be ZEV. 
The general demand for EV is already huge in BC at least and with more and more automakers coming out with fully electric cars or hybrids, Tesla creating a milestone in the EV industry and global markets like China, Finland, UK etc. planning to ban gas cars, the market for EV seems bright. It'd be in the best interest of Canada to introduce this mandates earlier than later. 66% of total energy in Canada is produced through renewable energy and with the cars now having a range of 400-500 km, we're up for some clean driving.
If the future is so bright for EV's why do you need to ban gasoline powered cars and mandate or subsidize their introduction? They are HUGE in BC reaching a whopping 1% of all new vehicle sales by the end of 2016. 
You are absolutely right we do not have to ban gas powered vehicles. We should let them die naturally and this will inevitably happen. EVs price will go down fast since the batteries are getting less expensive and more efficient at the same time. We should credit Tesla for influencing the changes in the industry. Now all the big players are changing gears into the EV market and we will observe a natural transformation into offering more EV vehicles in their dealerships.
Use your adjectives carefullyHUGE is relative. If every personon your street had an electriccar, BC Hydro would need to spend 10 million $ upgrading the power system just to your street - that is HUGE.
Target should be much more than 10% of new vehicles by 2020. Over their lifetime, zero emission automobiles are already almost at par with petrol vehicles, if not at par. Soon there will not even be a dollar reason not to choose electric.
Canada cannot produce enough electric energy to power the chargers for all those electric vehicles. The generation of that electricity will require major building of Hydro, Fossil Fuel and/or Nuclear energy power plants to support all those vehicles. Think of the environmental destruction required to build a few new Hydro projects or the GHG emissions associated with more fossil fuel powered generation plants. The only real alternative is nuclear power. The waste can be placed on a rocket and sent to the sun.
The electricitydemand from EVs is relatively small being ~3600 kwhper year for a chevy bolt used for 20,000 Km/year. The typical house in Canada uses ~10000 KWh, more in places like Quebec and British Columbia. Cars can be recharged mainly at night so the burden on the power grid is low. Rather it is a good flexible load perfect for sources such as wind, small-hydro and nuclear. A ~20% increase in over all power demand would be rather easy to handle provided the demand was offpeak. A lot of the transmission and distribution infrastructure exists for meeting peak daytime loads. 
I think we will need range extension. Perhaps methanol fuels cells such as those made by Serenergy in Denmark would be agood option. I think electric cars should be mandated, but there should be the ability to extend the range through a small engine or fuel cell. Pure electric vehicles do not strike me as viable for up to 70%, but electric vehicles with range extension would be ideal. Once they are mass manufactured the cost will come down. To encourage mass adoption, however, the upfront cost must be very similar which requires either regulations or incentives.
Why stop there?!? Making of the actual vehicles and the batteries should also be ZERO EMISSION as well! Do you realise how energy it takes to smelt steel and aluminum? As well as how destructive mining the metals used in the rechargeable batteries are to the environment. Google it
I am certain all the child laborers in the Democratic Republic of Congo would be excited to hear your plan.
I don't think we can mandate the market, we need it to go where the most efficient vehicles are. We can give EV's a temporary leg up by offering some tax rebate, parking savings cost, or something, to encourage buying them but if people are told they have to buy EV's no matter what, the EV manufacturers run to the bank laughing and have little reason to become more efficient.
Canada needs a solution for delivering goods and supplies to remote regions where climate change has caused ice roads to become unreliable and are often too expensive or would cause environmental damage. Cargo transport airships can greatly reduce green house gases (zero emissions) since they can be electrically powered through the use of a fuel cell. (they can take the extra weight) These aircraft do not require the usual airport infrastructure making them great for operating in remote regions of Canada. They also do not require any power for their lift due to the physical fact of using lighter than air gases.
First Nations areliving in remote areas will be better serviced and since the aircraftrun on electricity, it saves a lot.
Unfortunately airships have extremely serious problems with high winds and icy conditions.  See USS Macon ZRS-5 and USS Akron ZRS-4. 
the technology for hydrogen powered vehicles already exists in Germany where they are in the midst of implementing the use of hydrogen,on there railway systems ,why not in cars and trucks here
Unfortunately hydrogen is actually a terrible way of moving energy around due to its extremely poor de-facto energy density (when storage is included). Also we still don't have a really efficient way of making it.  We're better off following Tesla's example and installing SuperChargers or equivalent. 
Ballard's a Canadian company, this blog post on fuel cell buses may be of interest. http://blog.ballard.com/5-key-benefits-of-hydrogen-buses-for-scandinavian-transit
@Phil, while you are correct hydrogen is still a good option to be considered for trains.
BC is running in 90% on a hydro power as you know. Since the water out of the dams needs to flow into the rivers there is lots of unused water power during low demand periods. This can be utilized to produce low cost hydrogen to be used by cars, buses and ... future trains. Powertech based in Vancouver develops hydrogen engine technologies and we have hydrogen cars running within the city and yes we have several hydrogen stations to tank. Several years ago there was a great plan to build hydrogen stations along the I5 from Van to LA for hydrogen powered buses and cars. Don't know why this project never materialized. That was a great idea though. Wes
OK, who is going to pay to set up a totally new technology and distribution system?
Public transit buses are probably a good place to begin because routes, daily consumption and demand over time are (relatively) predictable. The windmill in downtown Toronto, on the CNE grounds was generating hydrogen more than ten years ago, what happened with that? http://magazine.utoronto.ca/summer-2005/hydrogen-village-toronto-portlands-energy/
As for the distribution system, there are a few options, one is decentralised reformers using natural gas or decentralised electrolysis, tank truck delivery using liquid hydrogen, or we can use hydrogen as an alternative to natural gas fuel (even if the hydrogen comes from natural gas we can capture the carbon. Kiwa Gastec in the UK is doing a lot of work. Hydrogen can also be mixed with natural gas to create a blended fuel. Roughly 5% hydrogen can be blended with natural gas prior to creating significant problems. Hydrogen production can be a good way to handle surplus wind and solar. Some of it can then be converted back to electricity, albeit at a low efficiency of ~30-50%
Wind and solar have proven to be expensive and unreliable energy sources. They do not seem to reduce CO2 output in nations rhar have invested heavily in them as coal and or natural gas are used to meet the energy needs when wind and solar are not available. The current power source's that supply low CO2 with reliable output aree hydro and nuclear. Investment in these sources which have three to fice times the working life makes much more sense. With an overall lower lifetime CO2 output when you include the concrete, steel and land use changes needed for wind and solar. Concentrate on reliably and let the unreliables compete with our incentives different from those given to reliable energy sources. 
Your comments on lifetime are important- Conventional power plants seem to last for 50 years. Renewables barely payout in their 25 year life even with massive subsidies.
At present solar panel and battery storage prices fall down so that ROI is around 10 years and the lifetime is 20 years with marginal maintenance costs. No GHG emission and no massive transmission required. DERs (distributed energy resources) are the futer and the conventional power plants will be passe in 20-30 years. Small nuclear will have some space providing the technology will besafe and compact. Wes
Right on Every industrial device needs maintenance, the eggheads, and bean counters seems totally out of touch with this reality 
More research/adaption of fossil fuels is needed. Oil & gas can be made more CO2 efficient. Solar & wind are the current public favorite but rarely analyzed properly. They are not cost effective at this time. 
Wind energy is generally cost-effective without subsidies due to lower costs from advances in technology and manufacturing. One example are stretch rotor turbines which operate at a capacity factor of 50%. In terms of renewables not reducing CO2 emissions, which jurisdicationsare you referring to? In Germany. this is the case as they are shutting down nuclear and building goal (Sometimes Greenpeace is their own worse enemy)? 100% renewable is quite difficult so I agree with Dwayne's point on reducing the GHG intensity of fossil fuels. For example, coal, pet coke and natural gas can be converted into hydrogen and the carbon can be captured. These plants emit no CO2 and can provide the needed backup. It is important to have at least two weeks of energy storage to account for the variability of renewable. Fossil fuels with CCS can act as a form of low-carbon backup.
One km square of solar panels launched in geosynchronous orbit (40,000) km. where the sun is always shining, The energy is transmitted to earth by microwave radiation and fed to the grid. Capital costs are huge but lifetime is many decades and no storage is needed. The sun puts out infinite energy and even a fraction would be enough to supply earths' needs indefinitely.
TOTALLY UNREALISTIC & infinitely expensive.
Not all think the idea off the wall. http://www.salon.com/2016/12/04/houston-we-have-power-space-based-solar-power-could-be-the-final-frontier-in-renewable-energy/ 
In thermodynamic terms the dry weight of a tree + O2 = energy. Energy is energy whether it is made from sunlight, a hydroelectric dam of by burning fossil fuels. Not burning fossil fuels saves as much oxygen as a tree produces. 1 m^2 of 15% efficient PV panels produces > 1000KwH/year in Canada. Place gridtie PV panels on rooftops and over south facing sidewalks. Big Energy will not like the idea. It works for everyone- just do the math thermodynamically instead of confusing us all with CO2 equivalents. 1 m^2 of 15% efficient PV panel = 2 trees. Diversify electricity production- Germany takes 40% of its power from renewables without needing extra storage- and they are farther north than most of Canada's population centres!
If the panel was free your comment has merit
The reason Germany doesn't need storage is because they fill-in their intermittent renewables generation with coal! And they are building more coal plants!! Solar EROI is dismal ... and that's not even considering the buffering dilemma. There's no way the economics of solar make any sense whatsoever.
The creation of the panel apparently used no energy as well.
Attached is a summary of the town hall hosted by Member of Parliament Andrew Leslie.
Step 1 Build pipelines all across Canada so all refineries have access to Canadian oil step 2 Build more Harvey crude/ upgraded refineries to process Canadian oil step 3 stop importing foreign dirty oil ( atrocious human rights and environmental) : Canada has the best environmental regulations and human rights! step 4 with the huge profits now produced fund alternative energy and environmental efforts and sustainably slowly switch to greener energies. Without hurting the Canadian economy by doing this out of step! 
Amen
A plan that makes sense. The public must be educated as to the real story of our energy and where it comes from. As a nation we should not be importing foreign oil.
We should not be importing foreign oil. We need to build our pipelines in Canada. We need to refine our own oil. We need jobs here.
Add more pipelines to enable Canada to export our natural resources beyond Nirth America. Add pipelines east abd end Canada's dependence on foreign oil.
Agree.
Importing oil from Saudi Arabia via tankers in the St. Lawrence does help our environment and it makes no sense. We are hypocritical and biased when we talk about environmental issues.
Get the oil to shore , use the profits to build and invest in clean energy. Just taxing and shutting off the taps does nothing to help us!!
Agree
Agree 100%. Developing a sustainable and renewable industry will allow for the eventual requirement of fossil fuels to drop drastically.
The biggest single cause of GHG emissions is the internal combustion and jet engines. These are the reason why we have a fossil fuel industry. Until these engines are replaced by zero emissions engines we will always have a fossil fuel industry. These engines are the cause of thethe problem while the fossil fuel industry is a symptom of the problem.
In today's technological climate, government should lead by example and mandate themselves to utilize video and teleconferencing rather than wasting fossil fuel and further contributing to poor environmental practices.
There are hundreds of products made from fossil fuels/hydrocarbons. Transportation may be one of the bigger ones but we still need the hydrocarbons for those other uses (plastics, clothing, medicines etc..)
oil and gas is needed and used for so many things, we need to get our head out of the sand and work as a country to best use our resources in a safe manner (Alberta has the highest standards, let's stop using Saudi oil that has no standards please and thank you)
Considering the 18 year hiatus on global warming as acknowledged in the IPCC AR4 it now appears that the world is waking up to the possibility that climate change is predominantly caused by other factors than simply CO2....... e.g., water vapor in the atmosphere absorbs vastly more IR energy than any other factor. So it appears that Al Gore has deceived us to the point of acting in error and the mainstream news media (not the most scientifically intelligent tribe) have pushed his agenda most effectively carrying the politicians along on this joyride..... This puts 1st nations, especially Canada in a position of taking the chemotheraphy prescription for only a common cold...... leading to economic death of the patient.
I think Canada, given our abundance of oil and gas, should strive to eliminate oil imports as soon as possible. Then, whatever surplus we produce to our own needs should be exported to "the world"...not just the US. This will require pipeline construction which our govt should expedite in the National interest. All provinces should participate in oil and gas prospecting and production...or face a penalty by way of reduced equalization payments for not participating.
Agreed. Then use some of the money that is now going to purchase foreign oil, plus some of the increased Government of Canada revenue that will come from increased domestic oil and gas production, to fund increased investment in technology to improve the "clean" efficiency of our production of our own oil and gas resources. For example carbon capture to mention one.
I believe a discussion into the use of geothermal heating and cooling must be had in the hopes that all new residential and commercial land development implement an initiative of this sort. If people are truly concerned about environmental practices and renewable energy, this is certainly a way to ensure environmental protection. The issue I see of this not having a discussion is that this would not allow for any tax collected on use nor would it provide a "service fee, delivery fee or other made up fee to any energy company/provider. This would be a win for all people and would certainly be a huge boon to a workforce dedicated to manufacture, implementation and support services.
I agree. We also need to develop several energy sources used in every new building being built. This needs governments implementing hard laws to put it into mandated building codes nationally. When governments want to move quickly they do so. bring in Incentives for using solar, geothermal,wind,hydro so that the more mass use, mass produced the lower the cost to use, the ones using it will make a better profit and it lowers our cities, towns etc GHG's and carbon footprints.
"The Canadian Gas Association & it's members undertook a visioning exercise to consider what the natural gas delivery industry & its end-use consumers could look like in 2050.  CGAs Vision 2050 focuses in on three key questions:  1.	What will a Canadian energy consumer look like in 2050? What energy mix and technologies could provide the necessary energy needs for consumers from industry to homeowners and businesses to the transportation and power generation system?  2.	What will the energy delivery industry itself look like in 2050? What will the mix of energy look like in 2050, including how much of the energy in our pipelines will be natural gas, renewable natural gas (RNG), hydrogen, solar fuels/synthetic natural gas, or some other product, and what other technologies will be required to reduce the systems & emissions profile & increase its efficiency?  3.	Are there key principles that should help guide all stakeholders? What are the high-level principles that should be in place to help guide the natural gas industry, governments and stakeholders when considering Canadas energy future?   In discussing Canadas energy future, many potential scenarios arise about both what society in general will look like as well as what the energy industry could evolve into.  A recent Environics poll indicated that between 2017 & 2050 Canadas population growth rate will steadily decline, with more seniors than children, causing a shift away from single detached dwellings to a higher growth rate for high-rise apartments with more one & two-person households.  People will use the internet of things to manage most aspects of their lives from energy usage, to ordering groceries, to where & how they will work.  Canadians in 2050 will also be totally connected with more choices & options available to them around many aspects of their lives.  With these background thoughts our industry has attempted to understand what the world may look like in 2050 in the context of the questions above.   What will the energy consumer of the future look like?    	Totally connected to the world around them, so readily able to access information on questions affecting their day to day well-being 	From that total connectedness, able to have a heightened awareness of the impacts of their day to day activities on the world around them  so more accessible by stakeholders like energy service providers 	Less in need of travel to connect for business, and possibly for other services, as more and more such things can come to the home 	Even more accustomed than today to instant access, and therefore even less tolerant of any interruptions of services 	Dependent on energy for more services, but probably requiring much less energy for any one service due to efficiencies 	Quite possibly even less well informed about where energy comes from as the quality & complexity of life increases in concert with people being further and further removed from the diversity of energy supply fueling that life.  	Probably living in an even more urbanized society than today 	Probably living in a society where energy should be even more affordable than today (given that energy has consistently become more affordable over time) 	Probably otherwise just like the consumer of today: trying to support him/herself and a family, trying to make ends meet, trying to get more for less.  What will the energy delivery industry itself look like?  	More integrated, total energy service providers; natural gas, electricity, transportation, etc., but not necessarily conventional utilities  they could be telecom, internet, automotive, energy producing, or other entities 	More choices for independent energy supply needs, with the development of more self-generation technology  meaning some changes in the regulated model 	More consolidation of existing players as rationalization and efficiencies occur amongst conventional players 	More entities playing in a range of markets  domestic and international - with a strong possibility of a significant presence by Canadian entities at the global level given their established bases (not unlike banking)  What are the key principles that could help guide all stakeholders?   	An open thought process There can be no preconceived ideas when considering the optimal solutions for meeting energy needs in the context of economic and environmental and other priorities.  	Government/industry cooperation An open policy and regulatory process that sets conditions rather than trying to set outcomes, allowing creativity in markets to flourish.  	Prioritized, incremental investment in a diverse, enabling energy future Significant, ongoing investment will be required to ensure a constant emphasis on innovation to drive efficiency and excellence.  	Clear understanding Society must have a clear understanding of the life cycle value of any energy decisions & their true implications including the full price of all environmental policies and the impacts on the capacity and resilience of existing energy networks.  For energy to remain reliable and affordable we must continue to leverage existing infrastructure and, using a combination of policy, regulations and market forces, innovate in the areas that can most effectively help improve our economic and environmental performance.  Summary  In short, the future means people will have the same human needs they have today, but will want them addressed sooner, more cost effectively and more reliably  and industry will need to respond to those needs, and government will need to keep in place the conditions to allow industry to respond.  We in the gas industry believe we will be a part of that future and are staying as nimble as possible to assure that.  The industry must aggressively pursue new alliances, non-traditional business models & forward-thinking strategies while always remaining focused on the superior value it delivers to Canadas economic prosperity & overall quality of life.    The industry will have to expand its scope & service offerings, drive innovation & technological change & continually strive to be the most efficient full-services organizations possible.  The Canadian natural gas delivery industry fully understands its essential role in the energy future of the country & stands ready to work with all stakeholders in building the necessary methodologies to help achieve Canadas goals of better environmental performance, affordable energy & economic prosperity & innovation."
...so these Wall Street folks wouldn't raise oil prices anymore. It's all their fault. And US, too.
The free market does a good job of pricing oil. If it's expensive it's because of levels of taxation added by government.
Developing countries need oil. As a source of energy, it is a key driver to lift their citizens out of poverty. Exporting our oil not only benefits the Canadian economy but also helps to raise living standards in developing countries. Of course we need to produce and export in an environmentally responsible manner. Building pipelines will also help to reduce our dependence on foreign oil that is imported into Canada from countries with irresponsible environmental standards. The royalties from oil can be used to develop other forms of clean energy. In the meantime Canadian oil is good for Canada and the world.
OIl is a major contributor to our economic well being for many years to come. We can develop pipelines and still be environmentally responsible. Pipelines are the safest means to move our oil and we need to get the pipelines to both coasts built w/o further delays. If our government continues to drag its feet on getting Energy East progressing we should put a carbon tax on all imported oil coming to Canada. In addition there should be a carbon tax on all oil tanker traffic going up the St. Lawrence.
I emigrated to Canada from the United States where I was licensing asphaltene removal technology worldwide.We adapted the asphaltene removal technology so that it could process bitumen as it comes out of the ground. We also designed a very simple diluent removal unit to remove the diluent fromdiluted bitumen since 54% of the diluent will no longer be needed. Then we adapted the gasification technology to run at full combustion and decided to use the produced water to cool the combustor. This makes steam by direct contact steam generations and the steam and flue gas are cooled by making clean steam for the process and emissions free electric power generation.
Canada and western Canada needs to quadruple energy production from use of uranium in CDN nuclear power plants thus reducing the amount of CO2 into the atmosphere. For the next 200 yrs until solar, wind and geothermal can catch-up with low costs and more efficient. Wind turbines and solar panel cover and take soil out of food production, so panels are not the full answer. Wind turbines kill flying animals. Nuclear power plants do not and does not take much land out of food production per kilowatt compared to solar and wind.
I just can't see how wind and solar will ever catch up for two straightforward reasons: Both are far too diffuse and there's no way to make significant improvements in the energy harvesting efficiencies. Secondly, and most importantly, their intermittency requires major buffering to get that harvested power to where and when that power is being demanded. There's no way that intermittently-used transmission facilities can be cost-justified and the resource demands for storage would require a major chunk of GDP to build and maintain. Nuclear is the future and the sooner we realize that, the better off our children and their children will be.
Keep continueproducing oil and gas, building pipelines east, west, south, develop our natural resources freely without minimal government regulations. This will keep our energy cost low, create jobsand everyone will benefit. The reason we are rich today is because of low cost energy. If we increase the cost of energy we just get poor with absolute no future. Canada's climate goals are false and misleading the public who has absolute no idea what is energy, what is it used for and where it can come from. There are no political, scientific, or religious reasons to do anything with the climate.The Earth is 4.6 billion years old....and its climate has been changing since then. Earth is in control, we can only adopt. Compared to the 4.6 billion years, I just say a small number 10 million, or no, lets say 1 million. Could someone tell me what would be the impact of the measures the present government wants to introduce in 1 million years from now? (The right answer is:absolutely nothing!)
Absolutely wrong.
Keep developing the fossil fuel resources we have. Keep our energy costs low! Do not destroy our economy by wasting money and tax dollars on inefficient renewable energy projects. Our contribution to global CO2 is negligible. Let's embrace that fact!
Industry Challenge One of the key challenges to the rate of growth of the bioenergy industry in Canada is that risks associated with biomass supply chains are not well understood. While concerns about technology, construction, and offtake have clear paths to resolution, at present there are no established protocols, standards, or even recognized industry best practices that developers, investors, commercial lenders, insurance companies and rating agencies can utilize and rely upon to empirically demonstrate supply chain risk. In the bioenergy field, certification processes and standards have been recently developed with regard to pellet quality. Standards help create a lingua franca among suppliers and buyers and create market efficiencies - efficiencies that have been key to the growth the Canadian export pellet industry in recent years. However, a properly standardized, recognized and accepted risk-based methodology and tool set to assess bioenergy supply chain risks under varying economic, technical and climatic scenarios has not yet been developed. The lack of a standardized and recognized approach (consisting of standards, methodologies and tools) means that bioenergy stakeholders are independently using inconsistent approaches and evaluation criteria, leading to unreliable assessments of project risks. Unclear understanding of risk also results in lower credit ratings for bioenergy projects: most are saddled with BBB minus ratings or less (junk bond territory). This results in significant project financing barriers for Canadian bioenergy projects and in millions of dollars of financial-drag on the projects that are eventually built: projects that are burdened with financing and debt cost up to 150 to 500 basis points higher than might otherwise have been required. Stern Brothers, a leading investment bank facilitating project financing for the renewable energy industry, confirms that this is a key challenge inhibiting bioenergy expansion. A solution to this problem lies in creating an established protocol or set of standards that gives credit agencies and commercial lenders a common approach and lingua franca when attempting to price feedstock risk. To the extent that standards and protocols are established to help capital markets better understand and price the risks inherent in biomass supply chains, capital will flow more easily to the projects seeking funding, and the rate of bioenergy project development in the Canada will increase. Objectives The primary objective of this project is to develop a framework of standards and certification protocols to allow companies in the biomass sector to clearly demonstrate the risk of their feedstock supply chain. The quantitative risk assessment architecture will provide the framework for development of a set of standards, indicators, guidelines, and recommended methods and tools to quantify supply chain risks and to rank and rate those risks on an objective and accepted scale. Targets/Milestones The architecture to assess biomass supply chain risk will include, (1) a set of proposed standards and definitions to assess the different types of risk that affect biomass supply chains and (2) a suite of methods and tools that can be used to quantitatively assess and rank those risks by probability and consequence.   Impacts and Outcomes The project outcome will be a published and validated framework of standards and a certification protocol that will provide the major credit rating agencies, commercial lenders, and bioenergy investors with a common and recognized means to evaluate and quantify the supply chain risks of Canadian bioenergy projects. The impact of this project is accretive and immediately transferable across the full spectrum of the bio-based industries: the benefits will impact bioenergy, advanced biofuels, bio-based heat and power, and pellet production, among others. The standardized and certified risk assessment process will reduce the level of uncertainty that is currently a main cause of low bioenergy project credit ratings and higher commercial debt costs. By so doing, it will unlock significant development potential in the bioenergy space and increase the rate of development of bioenergy projects in North America.  
Interesting approach to provide lower cost finance. How does this work with existing forest tenures for example? Don't we need some sort of widely-available biomass production industry.For example, getting dry wood chips for heating in smaller boilers 
Lets recognize that we are not the problem and put our economy back on track to not implode. It is astonishingly arrogant to believe mankind has any real impact on global climate change. Lets focus on real problems like plastic proliferation and quit chasing this ridiculous CO2 boogeyman  Quit importing oil from countries which abuse the environment and their people and secure our energy supply
Can you explain why CO2 is not the problem?
CO2 is not the only driver of climate change. Currently, we're shooting for something like 350ppmv in our atmosphere and there were times in the past when it was over 5,000ppmv......and interestingly, there were ice ages when the CO2 was highest, but solar activity was also less back then. We have been in an interglacial (warming)period for the past 11,000 yrs or so.......so we shouldn't be surprised that our climate is warmer. Real challenge is to decide if humans are the sole cause and can have any impact, or if the climate will still warm regardless. Anyway.......no matter what you think, there are some huge business opportunities.....like moving entire cities away from coasts....always a silver lining!
Climate change is real and has been happening for billions of years. We have had numerous warm periods followed by Ice Ages.
I support the oil and gas industries to create.more job our country..and to make sure environment safety too..you knw wht canada needs nw international market to export our natural resources..we sick and tayer only one market in usa we don't knw wht happen in the near future..therefore we can't trust only one market we need to export the oil and gas over the world..i really support been.more productive our natural resources thanks a lot
Most of our energy is used as heat. Shifting over to electricity would require a near quadrupling of electricity. Because heat demand is seasonal, this infrastructure would not be used most of the time, leading to high energy costs. What makes more sense in converting local natural gas systems to hydrogen. This way the carbon dioxide created by fossil or biomass could be captured while providing cost-effective low carbon energy. It is far easier to capture CO2 centrally than at every household. This approach is being considered in the UK, where the City of Leeds is seriously looking at converting its gas network to hydrogen. Shipping a gas through a pipeline is far cheaper than electricity. Furthermore, hydrogen is fuel agnostic enhancing energy system resilience and sustainibility. Additionally, the hydrogen grid would help store surplus renewable electricity over longer periods, making wind and solar energy more feasible. The flexibility of a hydrogen grid also means fossil fuels could be decarbonized such as coal, petcoke, natural gas and others. Finally, the hydrogen could also be used in fuel cell cars and other H2 vehicles if the develop.
The same technology that we developed to make SAGD Production of Bitumen CO2 emisisons free can also be used with coal and natural gas. If you are interested check my LinkedIn profile www.linkedin.com/in/richard-hood-b150b5129. See the postentitled "Asphaltene Stream Produces 26.3% Lower CO2 than Coal and 46% more that Natural Gas, But All Three are Zero with Flue Gas Sequestration."It shows a graph of the CO2 eimssions with and without flue gas sequestration.
Home and building owners heating with fossils such as propane and oil need to understand the opportunity and benefits of heating with modern wood heat technologies.States like Vermont, Maine and New Hampshire have fully developed wood heat supply chains including home delivery of wood pellets. Weshould be heating our homes with our sustainable forest resources. Governments can stimulate markets by being early adopters of these technologies inpublicly owned buildings. Maybe the forest ministers involved with CCFM want to have a friendly competition to see what province or territorycan generate the greatest uptake of modern wood heat technologies in the shortest amount of time. 
Thanks for your submission! Biomass is certainly a great option to look at for Canada's energy future. If you are interested in reading about a a success story, take a look at the Whitesand First Nation community who transitioned from diesel power to using wood pellets. If you would like to read more about how they transitioned, take a look here
I agree, Provincial and federal governments can play a large role in incentivising the development of the market. I worked for the District of Wells in BC for one summer and there are a fair amount of logistical challenges. However, if there are a few schools that want to hook up it can be viable. That said, even the chipper for a biomass boiler costs over $80,000 and that is a small one. A blower truck costing $300,000 plus is also needed. A renewable heat incentive such as the one in the UK would be the best way forwards. If there is no guaranteed marketed, the investment would be tough tojustify. Furthermore, many remote communities are on the natural gas grid in Canada. This is not the case in New England. Right now, natural gas is too cheap to make biomass thermal viable in many situations. However, as the market grows the costs will fall significantly. Boiler costs here are nearly double than those in Europe.
Burning wood or wood pellets is very polluting. That option is NOT a tradeoff.
I believe Montreal has banned fireplaces that burn wood and have legislated home owners to remove them. They next want to ban wood ovens for baking.
I am extremely concerned about how our country and provinces are tackling this challenge. In Alberta, the government has wasted 4 billion dollars to shut down coal plants 10 years sooner when anybody who truly understands climate knows that Canada plays a symbolic role in world outcomes due to the extremely small percentage of world emissions we have. There is no politician standing up for the costs impacting consumers. That issue is truly hitting home in Ontario now as consumers are being killed by the bad decisions made by their government to hand out long term power deals to renewable companies with no consideration to the impact it would have on consumer bills. The same principles apply to the costs impacting our businesses trying to compete on a global scale. We will not attract business if our infrastructure / energy costs are too high. We already have a huge advantage on a world scale based on the non-emitting hydro sources we currently have. We need to look for ways to take advantage of our natural resources to support the transformation. Natural Gas is an excellent example where it can be used as a transportation fuel and through the use of CHP technology can help meet our climate goals and keep costs down for consumers and business. It can also be an excellent back up for renewables when the sun does not shine (see Canadian winter) and the wind does not blow. 
I see your point, I would recommend that health externalities also be considered in the cost-benefit assessment. Furthermore, carbon emissions also impose a long-term cost on society of roughly $40 per tonne of CO2 on a marginal basis. Some values go much higher. A 1000 MW coal plant operation 8000 hours per year would cost society in $250 million per year in future climate change costs (0.8 tonnes CO2e per MWh). Assuming 4000 MW of coal plants in Alberta, the cost to society would be 10 billion to keep the plants open, excluding health costs. Society will likely save money overall by converting the plants to gas, wind and other low-carbon sources.
Thomas: You are not willing to look at the reality that if coal is burned using our technology it will have zero emissions per MWh. Think about it 4000 MW of coal plants in Alberta running just as clean as a solar panel or a wind turbine, but running nearly all of the time, day and night, calm days and windy days.www.linkedin.com/in/richard-hood-b150b5129.
Why do we have to be the only oil abundant country in the world with a struggling economy? The facts are that we do not. Poor government decisions are the cause. The world agrees we must clean up our act but to do this we need money, and selling our petroleum resources in the short term to fund future energy solutions is the only sensible answer. Already over taxed Canadians cannot cannot carry this burden.
We have developed technology to make Alberta Bitumen 40% less CO2 emitting than the average US barrel produced in 2005. This is the oil that should be used until we develop reliable electrical power that is available whenever it is needed.
Public transportation systems that are efficient and effective, and powered by renewable energy systems can assist in curtailing the massive CO2 and other GHG emissions associated with the transportation sector.  We should also be reivinesting money generated from carbon taxation/pricing in to improving transportation networks that utilize renewables energy technologies.
We need to support Canadian pipelines, like Energy East. Failing to do so means that foreign powers, dictatorships like Venezuela, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Qatar, etc., who answer to no one when it comes to pipelines, and the environment. These countries abuse their citizens, denying them the freedom of speech, persecuting the LGBT community, and by buying their oil, not only do we Canadians lose jobs and investment, but risk greater environmental threats. If projects, like Energy East, are cancelled, then not only must we pay for their oil, not to mention possibly being boycotted in the future, but we'll have to import foreign oil through ships, trucks rather than the more environmentally safer pipelines.
A very cogent argument. You are entirely correct.
We need to support Canadian Jobs through the more environmentally safer pipelines rather than give our money to foreign dictators like Venezuela, Saudi Arabia, Qatar and Kuwait. These countries don't allow or have any real environmental standards. They get our billions of dollars and use the money to prop up their total control of their people, harassing anyone who disagrees with them, including the LGBT community. Try holding a demonstration on their pipelines and see what happens to you. Buying their oil means being subject to possible future boycotts, and without projects like Energy East, means our environment will face greater environmental riskssince we'll have to not only import their oilbut ship it by ships, trucks and trains all known to be considerablyriskier than pipelines!
I agree! Approximately 700,000 barrels of oil per day are imported via Canada's east coast. Logically speaking (which means taking the politics out of it), we should, at the very least, offset all of that with our domestic products.
It is mind boggling that eastern Canada is sending billions every yr to these foreign Govts. Why do we do such a ridiculous thing?
Not buying Canadian Oil is economic stupidity.... we should be supporting "Canadian" industries, "Canadian" innovation, and "Canadian" institutions striving for safer transport of fossil fuels. The pipelines are by far the most energy efficient way to transport oil. 
It is important to 'normalize' new trends. All levels of government should lead by example and replace all their vehicles with electric vehicles. This will show how serious Canada is about actually transitioning to a low carbon future. Some people are uncertain about electric vehicles. Having friends and family driving them at work and hearing first hand experience about their performance would reduce a lot of that hesitation.
Canada can start by having all Federal Ministers use electric cars and stop idlingthem in the winter months outside the House of Commons.
The Fundy tides have huge potential for electric generation, and some is being done now. Also from general ocean wave action is the potential generation.
I think government needs to invest more money in the recycling of Used Cooking Oil and transforming it into bio-diesel. There is a non-profit here on Vancouver Island called Cowichan Energy Alternatives Society that does this and has for many years. They could do so much more if they had more grants. Members of the Cowichan Bio-Diesel Co-op purchase this bio-fuel as an environmentally friendly alternative. Who doesn't like their car to sell like French Fries? www.cowichanenergy.org www.smellbetter.org
Public transportation systems that are effective and effective, and powered by renewable energy systems can assist in curtailing the massive CO2 and other GHG emissions associated with the transportation sector.  We should also be reivinesting money generated from carbon taxation/pricing in to improving transportation networks that utilize renewables energy technologies.
Green energy employs a greater number of people per unit than conventional oil and gas. Government should collect royalties from fossil fuel into a seperate fund. This money can be used to transition the country towards renewable energy by allocating funds towards infrastructure and retraining workers so as to create more jobs, not less
Why does green energy employ a greater number of people per unit than conventional oil and gas? Because it is inefficient. The more people it takes to produce the energy, the more labour intensive it is, the more it will cost the consumer. If and when green technologies are cost effective without subsidy the public will embrace them. Meantime no taxpayer money should be used as a subsidy, nor should onerous taxes be imposed on conventional sources to make the green sources more attractive by comparison.
governments collect huge tax from the fossil fuel industry, but use it to fund your health care, education, roads, military, Quebec, Bombardier, Gneneral Motors, and the renewable energy industry already. The world needs oil and gas, and the world needs Canadian oil and gas. To pretend that renewable energy is even possibly a realistic solution, at this point in the world, is just foolish. Perhaps the Canadian government needs to honestly let Canadians know what oil and gas and the renewable industry really provide us all. There is apparently a large gap between reality and an ideal world.
No a rational strategy....Let engineers do what they do best...... provide viable and realistic energy solutions. Green energy via wind and solar is a total disaster. Only idiots put wind turbines and PV Solar Arrays in the direct path of seasonal hurricanes as they did in Puerto RICO to replace a more robust fuel oil, emergency diesel generation system that could restart within 3 weeks of this disaster.......wind and solar rebuilding requires six to eight months.....https://www.youtube.com/watch?time_continue=15&v=1AAHJs-j3uw
Green energy isn't economic, it's not scalable and it doesn't make money. Remove the subsidies. 
yes yes yes!!!!
we need to transition our workforce. Subsidies to the fossil fuel industry and money collected from the carbon tax can help workers retrain in the green energy sector.
This is the sadly simplistic viewpoint of the environmental lobby. Take a look at the amount of renewable energy generated, and then be prepared to turn off your lights, your fridge, and, gasp, your computer, as there is not nearly enough power generated by the green energy sector, nor will there be in our lifetimes, to power Canada. Retraining oil industry workers for the green energy sector, would just retrain them for the EI lines, and you would no longer enjoy health care, an education, roads, etc, etc. Platitudes like "retrain for the green energy sector" illustrates how the Canadian public must be educated on how the country works, how their lives are impacted, and how much power the green energy sector can really create.
I totally agree! We must transition Canada's economy.Moving fossil fuel subsidiesto renewable energy investments is a hugepart of the equation.
William most of our current electricity demand is met by hydro power (59.3%) with only 19.3% from fossil fuels. obviously it's possible to get off non-renewable power generation. NR Canada It's internal combustion transportation that will be the real challenge. But it's doable !
I say in short term less then 25 years allow pipeline projects like Kinder Morgan and Energy east because we will need oil for some time to come and pipelines safer then transporting oil by rail at the same time no to coal power generation expansion, I would also say yes to Hydro Electric power in the short term to medium term projects like BC's Site C dam project is ok with me and needed for our energy needs future and may having older having to be fixed up and millions spent of taxpayer dollars on upgrading old infrastructure like older dams; however I want to see more use of solar and wind power in Canada to offset leading away from an oil energy power based economy over the next 50 to 60 years and beyond. We can start doing solar and wind projectsnow and we will be helping to reduce green houses cases and our carbon footprint; we can not just hold our hands up a high and say we do not like the look of wind turbines or solar panels or dams and do nothing because with more cell phones, more electric car usage, although I do not see a future whereelectric cars are the total solution tomoving away from the combustion engine car due to increase demand charging electric cars will putthe powergrid and you need more power stations and in the short term the pollution may not be made at the car level with electric cars it is made at the power station; I think the hydrogen fuel cell car is better alternative to the electric engine car personally. We need to have more compromise and not let the environmental/political charged left side of the political spectrum hijack a balanced comprising approach that is a win for the economy and a win for the environment and ultimately does not hijack cost with lots of high taxes and massive long term federal, provincial or municipal debt loads that raise the cost of living for all citizen's taking away money from other programs like health, policing, and national defense for example. Lastly I think the comprise on shipping rawbitumen oil material over seas is to do more refining into regular oil ourselves with in Canada say between Alberta and BC build say three oil refineriesand that eliminates the need to ship raw bitumen over seas and ifa tanker spills product easier to deal with and can clean it up much easier then bitumen and less longterm dangers from bitumen spills and would increase jobs in energy sectorandnot devastate our economy, especially in Western Canada as much and wouldmean we have to rely less on foreign oil for Canadian needs too.
You are confusing refining with upgrading.
Build the Energy East Pipeline as soon as possible. Canada should be using its own oil instead of importing oil from the Middle East. The Middle East oil production is often produced with large amounts of methane. This is routinely not measured and is flared, creating huge amounts of C02 and other greenhouse gases. The Middle East does not have monitored environmental standards or adequate human rights standards. Many of these countries also support terrorism. An inconvenient truth. The Canadian oil sands emissions are strictly monitored and enforced to high standards. Wake up Canada if you really care about C02 emissions and educate the Canadian public about the realities in the Middle East. It is untenable that Quebec purchases Middle East oil, collects transfer payments from oil sands profits and does not support the Energy East Pipeline.
Short term, establish energy east. Reduce our dependence on. USA markets as well would be terrific Variable KWH electrical rate charge in BC currently unavailable..why? Ontario has a very effective plan with three different prices for KWH used at different times of day and night Pay out on home solar installations are 17 years in B.C.due to reimbursement rate for solar supplied to the grid. If the KWH rate isn't going to be raised allow deprecation of home installed solar over 3-5 yesrs to encourage us grey hairs to invest, hire installers and create a vibrant solar industry. Thanks, Roger Mitchell, Cranbrook,B.C 
The Energy East pipeline would remove Eastern Canada's reliance on foreign oil. Alberta and Saskatchewan can more than adequately provide whatever volumes are required. Not only would it keep Canadian tax dollars within our borders, but it would remove access to hostile foreign dictatorships and remove funding for terrorism. More Western Refineries would also improve Canada's situation.
Canadian Sovereignty, economy and the enviroment as a win win win. Canada must develop the oil and gas reserves in the artic in order to declare Sovereighnty by virtue of developing the area economically and therbye helping locals and enticing immigrants by employment. Pipelines connecting Inuvik through Norman wells to the west coast and east who purchase and use "blood oil" is not only prudent but economicaly a must. Our Goverment should lead the initiative and push through against all opposistion the establishment of the right of ways for the pipeline for both oil and gas, furthermore it should provide tax breaks to become a leader in NG development as per "Pickins" Plan reducing our carbon footprint nation wide. making us stronger closer more secure and independent. The needs of the many as fellow Canadians far outway the cries of a few.Canadas climate is harsh and requires above average carbon use. Lets quit taxing and start stimulating!.Export the carbon use the gas!
Canada, and its economy, needs Energy East, and that includes the province of Quebec. Western Canada has generously given transfer payments to Quebec and we need your generous support for a project that is in the best interest of all parts of Canada. Additionally, we need the NEB to remove roadblockstothe project, and the use of statements such as: "the NEB will consider upstream and downstream greenhouse gas emissions (GHGs) in determining whether these projects are in the public interest." Why is a company like Transcanada unfairly saddled with this highly unfair and prejudicial scrutiny when other sectors such as aerospace, automobile manufacturing, mining, or pulp and paper are not?
It is purely political that the NEB must consider downstream GHGs, all the while that Ontario builds cars, and trucks to burn the oil, and Quebec's own basket case, Bombardier, is highly subsidized to create jobs, that build airplanes to use oil. The Federal Government plays games with Canadians, and supports jobs in Eastern Canada, while attacking jobs in Western Canada, by allowing environmentalists to carry way too much weight in the discussions around how this country is run. These environmental organizations are heavily subsidized by non-Canadian sources, who have a vested interest in keeping Canadian oil off the world market. When will the Federal Government investigate these non-Canadian funding sources? The latest is the Russians are purported to be actively funding the environmental lobby.
yes build the pipeline going east.
it seems ludicrous to me that we pay astronomical amounts of federal and provincial tax payers dollars to import oil and gas from the Middle East. We have an almost unlimited amount of oil and gas in our own backyard (British Columbia , Alberta, Saskatchewan), yet we import it from other countries instead of paying ourselves. We need a pipeline that spans canada from shore to shore to shore. Pipelines have been proven to be the safest way to transport oil and gas and once built can be tapped into by all provinces and territories that need oil and gas. This brings jobs to Canadians! This would increase the taxes made by the government through income tax and tax dollars saved by not paying foreign countries for their oil and gas which is shipped over the ocean in tankers risking not only our shore and marine life, the those of anywhere the tankers travel.
Quebec seems to prefer foreign oil and the use of tankers on the St Lawrence River. Can anyone explain that practice?
It is BEYOND LUNACY to rely on foreign dictatorships for products that can be refined and used domestically. Not only would building the infrastructure create jobs, but the refineries coming online would increase employment and boost the economy further. Add to this the fact that Canadian taxpayer dollars will NOT be funding terrorism, but STAYING within our borders, and you have a winning combination.
As the Lac-Megantic trial begins, how can any other method of oil and gas transportation outside of pipelines even be suggested?
Canadian Sovereignty, economy and the enviroment as a win win win. Canada must develop the oil and gas reserves in the artic in order to declare Sovereighnty by virtue of developing the area economically and therbye helping locals and enticing immigrants by employment. Pipelines connecting Inuvik through Norman wells to the west coast and east who purchase and use "blood oil" is not only prudent but economicaly a must. Our Goverment should lead the initiative and push through against all opposistion the establishment of the right of ways for the pipeline for both oil and gas, furthermore it should provide tax breaks to become a leader in NG development as per "Pickins" Plan reducing our carbon footprint nation wide. making us stronger closer more secure and independent. The needs of the many as fellow Canadians far outway the cries of a few.Canadas climate is harsh and requires above average carbon use. Lets quit taxing and start stimulating!.Export the carbon use the gas!
The Province of Ontario has been made into a rust belt by all the crazy energy solutions that do little Clean coal is a great idea except for the politically correct morons in the Ontario Gov. Hydro costs have soared with all the crazy non dolt ions. A pipeline to the east coast from AlberTA is rational. Importing conflict oil from Saudi Arabia is insane. Sending oil by tanker trains through Quebec to the USA is really stupid when a pipeline is much more viable. It may be good for Warren Buffet'stocks in railroads, but not for Canadiand. Common Sense is lacking in this crazy Trudeau government era.
Indeed the Wynne government has taken the wrong tack with their Green Energy bill that subsidies wind and solar to the tune of billions of dollars PER YEAR!! Ontario would be far better off had the government stuck to a nuclear energy future rather than wasting money on windmills and solar panels.
Encourage mathematicians to become more involved in clean energy.
Absolutely right. We need to look at the subsidy models that are applied to green energy. Unfortunately, they can be seriously exploited to create generation faculties that generate little energy, and instead run on subsidy. We need real energy solutions, not convenient shovel ready projects that just drive up the cost of energy.
Mathematicians yes.... but more important..... allow the electrical engineers to do that damm jobs... that is what they are trained to do..... Environmentalists and politicians don't know anything about energy.
Canada should NOT be importing oil from Nigeria, Saudi Arabia and Venezuela. We are supporting terrorism and dictatorships!! We can and should be oil independent. Use Canadian oil.
Canada has vast amounts of oil and natural gas. We should be relying on DOMESTIC rather than imported product. Keep the money WITHIN our borders instead of funding terrorism overseas.
This really is a no-brainer. We need to eliminate purchasing imported oil and gas - especiallyin view of the countries that we currently buy from, and their appalling records on human rights and the environment..
For some reason people who buy electric and hybrid cars get massive rebates from government while people who cycle/walk to work and do errands and get nothing. Fix this. Establish rebatestowards city and transportation (not racing)bicycles, invest into cycling infrastructure, discourage businesses from providing free parking to customers and employees, etc.
Rebates are there to subsidize new technology because it is too expensive for the masses. Bike lanes and shared bikes are created daily across Canada (except in the winter) Our country is too big to eliminate cars altogether, it will take a lot of infrastructure to go 100% electric vehicles. I have owned an electric car for almost 2 years. I wouldn't go back to a regular car. These things take time.
we should be subsidizing all forms of mass transit including good rail and bus services like in Europe. You can go almost everywhere in Europe by public forms of transit. Even electric cars use enormous amounts of space, lanes, and parking, wasting space in our cities.
While I applaud your attempt to gain opinions on the energy grid, you have left out a large and reliable energy source. Your polls, predictions, content, etc. all leave out nuclear energy. Canada has successfully and safely used nuclear power in the past, currently, and should into the future. By excluding this energy source as an option, you limit the answers people can provide. The future will have more renewable energy, that is clear, but nuclear should be part of the mix. Please update your pages, information, polls, etc. to reflect this. Educating people on this low-carbon energy source should be a part of your plan to move Canada into the future.
Fully agree!!
Nuclear is a good thing. We have an abundance of Uranium. Nuclear is definitely a clean reliable and safe source of energy. There are over 450 nuclear reactors that have been providing energy to the world for over 50 years with very few accidents. Nuclear has provided the world power with far less impact on our planet than competing energy generators. 
Rapid progress has been made in fission nuclear including newer generation 3 and 4 fission reactors as well as many options for smaller, cheaper, more cost effective SMRs - Small Modular Reactors according to PhD Duane Bratt and many other experts on this subject. e.g., Toshiba's SMART SMR is smaller, cheaper, safer, cleaner etc. Spent fuel storage is rapidly becoming less and less an issue with these new reactors and their is evidence that all spent fuel can eventually be eliminated in a future hybrid reactor design which is both fission and fusion......Keep in mind that Fusion is still a long distance goal....
Stop using rail to ship oil. START using pipelines!
Agree. Build more in every direction and let the oil flow.
More pipelines mean newer pipelines to replace the older ones with new technology and monitoring. The people against pipelines have never educated themselves to see how many pipelines are actually in our country. Paid protesters are mostly the people who influence and motivate some of our locals. There are always followers that see the world throw rose colour glasses. Our news Media are always looking for stories and by reporting about these protests it creates more followers for the cause. Pipelines are a way of life and we have been using these pipelines for water and sewer for decades. Nobody protests Victoria BC sewer line that has been dumping sewage 24/7 into the Ocean for over 100 years.
Like. Pipelines are the safest way to move any product, waste or element.
We need pipelines to not only export our energy products, but to refine them and USE them within Canada. It is the cheapest and safest method of transportation of all oil and gas products.
Energy East Pipeline isjust another way of balancing the economic disparity between the provinces so as to help make Atlantic Canada economically self-sufficient and, at the same time, help Alberta'sonly viable contribution to Canada's economic future, Oil....... the most practical fit-for-purpose high energy density solutions for a myriad of uses.
Canadian Sovereignty, economy and the enviroment as a win win win. Canada must develop the oil and gas reserves in the artic in order to declare Sovereighnty by virtue of developing the area economically and therbye helping locals and enticing immigrants by employment. Pipelines connecting Inuvik through Norman wells to the west coast and east who purchase and use "blood oil" is not only prudent but economicaly a must. Our Goverment should lead the initiative and push through against all opposistion the establishment of the right of ways for the pipeline for both oil and gas, furthermore it should provide tax breaks to become a leader in NG development as per "Pickins" Plan reducing our carbon footprint nation wide. making us stronger closer more secure and independent. The needs of the many as fellow Canadians far outway the cries of a few.Canadas climate is harsh and requires above average carbon use. Lets quit taxing and start stimulating!.Export the carbon use the gas!
Allow to pipelines to be build !!! we have been waiting decades. No more stops to the initiative of building the pipelines in this country.
Let the pipelines happen. Our prime minister wants to engage with China. They believe in coal. Canada has always found a better way. Let us lead. The Paris Climate agreement is such a farse. Do not kill what Canada has to offer. We are a great nation so stop acting like we are the enemy for goodness sake we see the light. Coal will happen. Really we get our oil from Saudi in the east!!! Please for once Ottawa fight for Canadians. Justin you keep saying Canada is the best. So for once for goodness sake show it. Support our beautiful country and the lovely natural resources we have to help the world. The Paris accord is an insult as we cause so little to carbon. Stop acting like a follower and lets become acceptable leaders and for for once be proud of our natural resources, not ashamed of what we have to offer. So far Im so disappointed where the current government is going. Dont be a follower be a leader that takes courage and not pleasing people who really dont have our best interests. 
Our politicians are listening to the paid protesters and to Hollywood who are flying around our country telling the world Canadian Resources are bad. The USA has their own agenda. They started the clear cutting campaign to try to devastate our forest industry. Trans Mountain pipeline to stop Canada from exporting our Alberta oil to the world so we have to sell it to the American's at a 20% discount. They successfully slowed our LNG industry to get their Louisiana plants up and operating before Canada get a foothold in that market. Now the US is trying to buy our Nat Gas because they do no have the reserves to supply LNG to the world. When are our Leaders going to do what is best for Canada and not say or do whatever they need to do to protect their own jobs?
agree
We need to step up our efforts to EXPORT our energy products. We have vast amounts of oil, gas AND coal for export. We also require to start using our products WITHIN Canada instead of relying on imported oil from abroad. Pipeline construction, REFINERY construction will create jobs and boost the economy.
Canadian Sovereignty, economy and the enviroment as a win win win. Canada must develop the oil and gas reserves in the artic in order to declare Sovereighnty by virtue of developing the area economically and therbye helping locals and enticing immigrants by employment. Pipelines connecting Inuvik through Norman wells to the west coast and east who purchase and use "blood oil" is not only prudent but economicaly a must. Our Goverment should lead the initiative and push through against all opposistion the establishment of the right of ways for the pipeline for both oil and gas, furthermore it should provide tax breaks to become a leader in NG development as per "Pickins" Plan reducing our carbon footprint nation wide. making us stronger closer more secure and independent. The needs of the many as fellow Canadians far outway the cries of a few.Canadas climate is harsh and requires above average carbon use. Lets quit taxing and start stimulating!. 
Greenpeace projects that the world will still be using ~60 million barrels of oil daily by 2040. Exxon Mobil predicts 110 million. Anyone's projections have us using hydrocarbons for the foreseeable future. The world needs more Canada. If we want to meet emissions targets we need to curb our own behavior, invest in public transportation, and allow resource development to pay for it through royalties and taxes to external markets like East and South Asia through pipelines. Lets encourage geothermal, hydroelectric, tidal as our reliable electricity sources.Let ususe our resource royalties wisely and invest in transportationinfrastructure for our lower emission future.
Greenpeace is a corrupt organization that distorts facts to further there cause, I don't believe anything they say!!
Society in Canada in 2017 has two undeniableissues to deal with. (a) garbage/out of control landfill b) a guaranteedrenewable energy source for electricity, water, oil. We can deal with both issues simultaneously with high temperature/pressure incineration of landfill. Studies have proven it can be successful. All it needs is the will to tackle it. It is probably the most extreme level of recycle available and it is and will be renewable for the foreseeable future.
Let's build out our energy distribution systems, like pipelines, to become global strategic players. 
I agree
Instead of buying oil from foreign sources and growing their economies, we need to keep Canadian dollars in Canada, gather taxes from those revenues and innovate within Canada using the profits. This innovation would look like reducing emissions on all forms of oil and gas production, transportation and heating. Innovation would also cover replacing fossil fuels but with fuels that would provide the same power, ease of use and refueling that oil and gas currently provide
There is no way Canada should have to import oil and gas we have an abundance of it here we need to start building more pipelines and refineries and stop importing Saudi and American oil. Im sorry Justin but oil and gas is here for a while yet
Stop the import of Oil and gasoline it should be forbidden, allow the pipelines to be built, we will generate our own sources, and money stays in Canada.
agree, allow pipelines to be built let's increase our export capabilities 
It is insane to not ship Alberta, British Columbia and Saskatchewan crude and gas to eastern Canada and continue to purchase those resources from the USA and other countries especially when we have to buy those supplies in USA $. We are taking about $ 50 million a day out of the Vanadian economy. That is 18 billion a year.
Liberal government = insanity
I believe we need the oil to be delivered to both coasts to further continue with our social programs. Yes we need renewable energy but most peopl are no where near being able to afford this now.
We need to build pipelines in both directions west and the east and Build refineries to refine our oil and quit selling it as a basic raw material we need to refinance so were not importing from the states and Middle East
When are people going to wake up and realize we have all been duped by radical environmentalists and loser politicians such as Al Gore who then are allowed by governments and the mainstream news medias to take control of energy solutions away fro those who know it best..... the energy scientists and electrical engineers? 
Ah yes Al Gore, the very credible person who "invented the internet". and his "inconvenient sequel". Last time I checked Gore was living in a large, air conditioned mansion, and travelling around the world via airplanes. Does Mr. Gore now claim to have a background in climatology too?
Canada needs economic engines for employment and revenue to support the quality of life we have had to date. Now that the States no longer require as much oil and gas from us due to changes in technology ie horizontal drilling and fracking. So we need pipeline infrastructure such as Energy East which would provide employment at the corporations expense and deliver cheaper oil to eastern Canada safely. Currently eastern Canada imports oil from the Middle East at world prices via tankers. We need to do some nation building in a timely manner as this is a global economy with which we compete. The States now export both oil and natural gas. We can't even get our product to tidewater to export it. The Feds have a moritoriam on tankers along the west coast so even if they get the twinning of Kindermorgan going we can't export it. If Canadians don't wake up soon we will be a third world country in 10-20 years. We have to responsibly exploit our resources. That's our bread and butter and always will be. Next year the amount of transfer payments will drop noticeably. That will be a wake up call to the east hopefully. Currently we are selling our oil and gas to the States at big discount losing millions everyday. They must love us. We need to embrace capitalism. Socialist governments both federally and provincially will take our economy down by not growing it and taxing us to death. Ie coming after small businesses which are the risk takers that create economy and grow it. If there are no incentives for this then we will all eventually be depending on government to carry us through taxation as the main source of revenue. Alberta has sent over 200 billion dollars out of province to mainly eastern Canada with a large chunk going to Quebec. This is since ~2000. There's no way you can replace this economic engine with so called diversification. Good to diversify but huge shoes to try and fill. Time for some common sense and critical thinking to prevail otherwise Canada will be in deep trouble. There are several million kilometres of pipeline all over North America and fracking has been going on for over 50 years. Time to get perspective and get moving.
With the United States producing oil at record levels, it has done whatever it could to hobble Canadian oil and gas production, keeping our oil in reserve for when they're production runs out. And Canada has played right into their hands. We need our Federal Government to facilitate getting Canadian oil to tidewater as quickly as possible. Maybe then Prime Minister Trudeau will have enough revenue to get those boil water advisories lifted on our First Nation reserves, creating enough wealth through the sale of our natural resources rather than taxing the middle class so heavily.
Generation 3 and 4 Nuclear fission reactors including SMRs, i.e., Small Modular will and were always the 2nd best electrical grid power source with hydro power generation and tidal power being the 1st best choice. 3rd best choice will remain combined cycle tubine natural gas power generation. These will make pluggable hybrid and electric cars environmentally more feasible. Jet fuel will remain the fit4purpose fuel for many generations due to severe constraints imposed by laws of physics and severe ongoing challenges to increase battery energy density needed to minimize battery space and weight for aircraft.
Canada and Canadians are responsible producers of energy that the world needs. IEA and US DOE have predicted that oil and natural will be the major sources of energy in 2040. We as a nation need to take leadership to support our energy companies, industry coalitions such as COSIA, University research labs (such as the one in University of Alberta) in their research effort to meet the dual challenge of meeting increasing energy demand and emissions reduction. We also need to support NSERC to fund fundamental research of all forms of energy which can lead to breakthroughs that can create industries of their own.
Energy independance: no more imports, encourage exports of responsibly produced energy.
Canada is a resource to the world. Demand for oil is still on the rise. Our oil production is ethical. Our oil companies spend billions to better our environmental footprint. Our oil companies employ people, families with children and therefore like everyone else they care about the future of the planet. Pipelines are the safest way to move oil. Protesters get too much air time and do not represent the majority of Canadians. If the current government wants to keep its job it should listen to the real majority because if they dont they will, you will get your pink slip...
The government seems to encourage the words "social license". Should social license not include the ethical production of oil and gas? To abuse the phrase social license for the benefit of the environmental movement is absolutely myopic, and undervalues many social interests Canadians stand for...basic human rights, the rights of women, corruption in Middle Eatern, African and Russian regimes. In the environmental movements efforts to hold social license as important, they are undervaluing human life everywhere else on the planet.
Come on Canada...we are at an impasse with the loss of our eastern pipeline build. Oil consumption, globally, continues to rise, we have the product but sell to the US at a discount in lieu of refinery capacity....our Energy Future is not solar, wind etc. its oil/gas as is our present. Solar and wind power will grow but are decades if not longer from providing a meaningful supply. If our country wishes to thrive incorporate oil/gas into the plan.
Canada must develop the oil and gas reserves in the artic in order to declare Sovereighnty by virtue of developing the area economically, helping locals and enticing immigrants by job ops. Pipelines connecting Inuvik through Norman wells to the west coast and east who purchase and use "blood oil" is not only prudent but economicaly/enviromentaly a must. Our Goverment should lead the initiative and push through against all opposistion the establishment of the right of ways for pipelining for both oil and gas, furthermore it should provide tax breaks to become a leader in NG development as per "Pickins" Plan reducing our carbon footprint nation wide. making us stronger closer more secure and independent. The needs of the many as fellow Canadians far outway the cries of a few.Canadas climate is harsh and requires above average carbon use. Lets quit taxing and start stimulating!.Export the carbon use the gas! As a nation we need to think strategically about the future and much more realistically. The use of nat gas domestically and the export of our oil will reduce both or economic and carbon deficits changing just toronto to Natural gas as a primary fuel saves more emmisions then the oil sands footprint. Stimulating economic expansion, opportunity Sovereignty while being practical and realistic about geographical and technological realities. 
Whenever you need electrical energy you pull the switch on small box and it produces electricity. Electrical energy is generated from surrounding us virtualenergy see (in physics it is called physical vacuum) and this source is infinite. In layman language it is called "free energy". As PhD physicist I know it exist and it can be proven and utilized. It is so frustrating to see how short vision of the future you people in government have. The term free energy is not even in your tags or points in survey.
free energy comes from the sun........electromagnetic over an extremely broad spectrum. Producing electricity costs money no matter how you produce it there is a capital cost and an ongoing maintenance and management cost.
Just wondering... there really wasn't much to the poll other than guesstimating what the future holds. In terms of changes to our home, most of which we've already done... there was nothing that pertained to what I think of pipelines or in particular my thoughts/perceptions of the future in oil and gas. I am for pipelines. I think transporting oil by train is ridiculous when the technology now around pipelines is so much better. I did read about how oil can be put into something like a pellet and transported. I am also for that. What disgusts me is that we (Eastern Canada) is buying oil from the Middle East. Not to mention the human rights issues and possible money going to terrorist cells, but the transportation of the oil through the St Lawrence Seaway.
why are we not supporting our own oil usage ?is it really necessary to go the Middle East to purchase?
I think most people want clean energy sources. I also think that thinking people understand that we are 30 years away from viable commercial alternative energy sources and that we will need oil and gas and their byproducts for some time. Canada is a cold country and I'm not willing to give up our reliable energy source until we have proven alternatives. Along with Norway, Canada has one of the most well managed oil and gas industries in the world - if there is more we can do to decrease our carbon emissions, then government has a role to play to help make that happen. The world needs more Canadian oil so let's build the necessary delivery systems to deliver our first class product. I also find it ridiculous that Ontario and especially Quebec oppose energy east pipeline. Quebec still pumps raw sewage from 100 municipalities into fresh water sites, including our beloved St Lawrence. Quebec which recently announced the possibility of starting oil and gas exploration!
Note that thr poll questions are leading and hughly biassed to renewanles.
I would agree with how bias the poll is towards renewable energy as well as age. I would be lucky to still be alive by 2050! To completely change Canada's energy requirements to renewable sources by 2050 would be irresponsible to many Canadians' needs and place huge hardships on less affluent individuals. To think that we could completely convert our transportation requirements to electric vehicles is rather naive given the size of the country, distribution of population, remote locations and the lack of Government support for creating the necessary infrastructure to properly support a diverse economy! We have huge natural gas resources in this country that would be a cleaner alternative to conventional or unconventional oil. The distribution infrastructure, to not only Canadian markets but especially to foreign markets, should be a high priority for any Government. This alone would help reduce the world's carbon footprint! 
I am astonished at the hurdles and moving goal posts put in front the energy industry that has demonstrated all of the characteristics we admire in entrepreneurs - innovation, perseverance and wealth creation. This industry can be accused of being arrogant and having tunnel but it has proven it can change. We must wean ourselves off of foreign oil and gas, develop access to new markets in the safest way - thru pipeline expansion, continue to meet the highest environmental and safety standards and continue to develop our energy economy to establish our place as a world leader.
agreed... the government is always there for bombardier even though their planes consume jet fuel and emit CO2, when it comes time to help the real hard-working Canadians in the oil and gas industry, they just make it harder and harder for us to create the wealth our country could otherwise be enjoying... ridiculousto say the least... Canada has the oil reserves to make a middle-eastern style of wealth, with indoor ski hills, palm islands and the like, instead our hard-working, honest oil and gas workers are made to satisfy enormous regulations and burdens instead of living the wealthy life we all deserve and could have... from the blue collar guys drilling wells to the engineers and geologists planning the wells... all these gals and guys are the wealth engines of the country... time to just let the prosperity happen instead of making it harder and harder
Totally agree with Cheryl Knight's comments. It doesn't take rocket scientists to figure this out. What are we waiting for?
It will take a very, very long time to significantly reduce our dependence on oil. It goes even beyond energy, it is even the everyday products we use. Having said that oil will be used for many years yet, but hopefully it will be on the decline as other sources are affordable and usable. In the interim, we as Canadians can reduce pollution from non-renewable sources by sourcing them here instead of overseas. Sourcing them here is the right thing for several reasons. 1. Canada has by far a better record on environmental and human rights issues when it comes to the oil and gas sector when compared to those countries we often import from. If we shut down our development of oil and gas, another country, most of them with terrible records in these areas will step up and sell us the oil we use (they actually do already!), effectively increasing the amount of human rights and environmental abuses globally. As the world transition away from oil and gas, let's be leaders in developing the most environmentally friendly way of extracting and processing nonrenewable resources so that we are taking business away from those who have little or no value for those things. Stopping Canadian development only serves to increase worldwide pollution and abuses, relying on our own, is the best cure, because then the values we hold dear can be monitored locally rather than having no control over them. If we want to protest, oil extraction, lets start with the countries that have the worst records. 2. Importing resources when we have them locally, increases global pollution, because it adds pollution through the additional transportation required. 3. Developing locally, the taxes taken from those corporations, are, and can be funneled into developing alternative sources. Taking foreign resources, we have no tax base to draw from to begin the transition, it has to come from something else. As we transition away from oil and gas, the real solution is reducing our consumption, not stopping the development of them. That is the long term solution. Stopping local development of them only serves to increase foreign abuses and effectively increase the problem we think we are solving.
I strongly agree with the writes views
India is working with Canada's CANDU Gen 3+ Reactor with help from Canadian scientists so that the fuel rods are now containing thorium in conjunction with enriched uranium. Thorium is vastly more abundant and burns cleaner. Hence the term "DIRT" meaning the fuel exists everywhere even in our surface soil. CANDU reactors are renowned to be the safest full sized fission reactors in the world. Had these been used a Fukishima they would have failed safe and no radioactive waste would have been released into the environment.
political policy advisor met with Saskatchewan's Premier Brad Wall promoting SMR's Small Modular Reactors as an smaller city and large town electrical energy solution. These SMRs are the source of power in many Arctic Research vessels.....ensuring reliable boat power, heat etc. for an entire winter if they get stuck in ice. Even the greenest Environmental scientists prefer to travel on these nuclear powered vessels for personal safety reasons. But in addition to the incredible amount of red tape, objection from misguided Greenpeace and other money grabbing environmental agencies, politicians are scared to bring nuclear power up for public discussion and scared to support it....... almost entirely because of negative perception by the ignorant masses thanks especially to Greenpeace. People need to realize Greenpeace is a NGO working against Canada's right to self-governance. Stop supporting Greenpeace and advise your friends of these facts so as to do likewise.
when something works for us why do people always want to stop it 
We must end Canada's dependency on foreign oil by developing domestic sources AND have the infrastructure in place to transport domestic oil to refining facilities and markets. Keep the resources, taxes, jobs, and other benefits in Canada. Oil and gas may eventually be phased out, but it won't happen overnight. In the interim, we need to apply some common sense to developing resources.
We need to build the pipelines . We use oil and gas every single day.
Amen! We need pipelines! Pipelines! Pipelines! Now!
We need pipelines, stop importing oil, if Canada doesn't develop the infrastructure for oil and refinement, we will be importing gasoline, and it is a dumb thing!! we have one of the biggest reserves of oil in the world.
We need PIPELINES and refineries in Canada - why aren't we using our own resources. Let's get this moving. 
we need pipelines to transport gas and oil to where the public lives because we do not live on a tiny island and we need need money from sales to supply the people of Canada with all essential needs every day and will be needed until it runs out . So use it while it is available.
The need for oil won't change for sometime. I can't imagine why we are buying oil from Saudi Arabia and Venezuela as I understand is happening in Eastern Canada now. Please get the huge reserves of Alberta oil flowing. Build refineries. Use Canadian oil. Help build ourCanadianeconomy!!
Canada has an enormous amount shale resource and even of next-generation unconventional natural gas resources waiting to be discovered in gas hydrates, coals, and even by recovering the remaining oil sands reserves through bacterial processes. We should embrace natural gas and oil everywhere and develop strong industries based in CH4 abundance as the Americans have done and continue to do. LNG exports, LNG and CNG transport etc. are all existing technologies we can improve and should have everywhere in Canada... let's apply our engineering and academic resources to these awesome technologies make  them even more Canadian, mainstream and profitable.  We would be so much further ahead if we focused on actually building natural gas infrastructure instead of listening to those who promote all kinds of futures based on non-feasible and just plain dumb and pie in the sky intermittent sources of electricitywhich kill rare birds of prey like disgusting wind turbines, compete with human food sources like putrid biofuels or take up enormous surface area with little economic value like money loser solar...
The oil and gas resources must be continued to be used. Not sure why so many people think electricity is clean when you have to use coal, natural gas or hydro to produce.
Why are your initial categories mixing activities and races? What if I was Inuit and in Industry? Seems flawed to me. 
The study seems biased. it does not contemplate that oil and gas will be a viable source of fuel for the future.
What? You mean our government is leading us down the garden path?Why use oil and gas when unicorn tears will do?
Our east coast is just as valuable and precious as the west coast. All oil tanker traffic to the east coast should be banned.
Why can't we take all the effort and resources being spent to resist the export of resources and have the focus on a solution that allows exportation but does it in an environmentally and responsible manner? Not everything is either LEFT or RIGHT, some of the best solutions take a hybrid approach. Can you imagine what kind of solutions we would have in place if all if the time and money spent on protest was diverted to actual R&D that delivered an end result? Collaboration is a powerful concept, if only it was applied more often.
Stop subsidizing the tar sands anduse this money to instead invest in clean energy.Canada couldbe a huge leader in clean tech innovation if it restructures its investments. The fossil fuel industry is only feasible because of enormous financial support from the government.
That really couldn't be farther from the truth. Some sources, like the IMF, will tell you that fossil fuels are subsidized to the tune of trillions globally, but those are hugely exaggerated and not applicable in Canada. For example they pen up a significant portion of "subsidies" to things like car accidents, road maintenance, and road congestion. (Do EV drivers get in less accidents?). They also include countries who lower the price of fuel through direct cash subsidies. We do the opposite in Canada, taxing the S*** out of fuel ! Most of the Canadian "subsidies" you refer to are tax breaks for projects that wouldn't see the light of day without some help. Which means our government gives tax breaks (Not cash handouts) in order to collect more royalties in the future.This islike any other natural resource industry. 
This couldn't be farther from the truth. Sources claiming O&G is a net taker of government funds include things like car accidents, road maintenance, and traffic congestion in their skewed view of subsidies. More balanced sources peg Canadian subsidies around $220 million, while our governments collect about $18 billion / year from taxes, royalties, land sales, etc. Montreal Economic Institute has a good article on this and FP has an easier-to-read one: MEI on Subsidies Financial Post
Canada hasenormous untapped potential for renewable energy generation from less common sources. We should explore tidal energy, wave energy, bioenergy (anaerobic digestion, landfill biogas, etc.) and geothermal. These are huge opportunities for innovation, jobs and a new economy.
Absolutely agree with you on this one.
Rather than exporting oil and increasing the global dependence on fossil fuels, Canada should invest in foreign renewable energy projects and EXPORT clean tech!!! We have an opportunity to take leadership and play ahuge role in addressing thiscritical global issue. Canada also has a moral responsibility to take action for a problem it has long contributed to, and to support the transition in countries that haveplayed a negligible role, but are facing the strongest impacts.
Canada doesn't have a competitive advsntage when it comes to developing solar and wind technologies.
Offer funding, support and incentives to faculty at Canadian universities that are pursuing clean energy development and climate solutions. We urgently need widespread innovation to ensure renewable infrastructure can berapidly adopted and is reliable, affordable and sustainable. Universities have a huge role to play anddeserve government support.
Continued operation and expansion of fossil fuel infrastructure is incompatible with meaningful climate action. Canada must say no to Kinder Morgan, Energy East, Keystone, etc. and phase out the tar sands. These projects would lock in fossil fuel infrastructure for decades to come and prevent a transition to renewable energy.
The world will always need fossil fuels - materials, agriculture and reliable power generation (think hospitals). Canada has the most environmentally safe energy extraction in the world and should be the supplier for these purposes.
Climate Leaders should build pipelines for the support of a healthy economy and generation of funds to invest in Renewable Technology. Without a healthy stream of funding (that DOESN'T include taxing the average family into poverty), we will be sitting around building hydro dams and windturbines out of paper mache'... A responsible Climate Leader takes the circumstances of today, maps out a reasonable but aggressivesource of funding for R&Dbut continues to make critical economy decisions to ensure that ALL Canadians have a place to work.
Fossil fuel infrastructure is essential to our economic well being, environmental sustainability, and transportation safety. The oil and gas industry creates jobs and is the major economic engine of AB and Canada. Current governments are hypocritical when they support/bailout the auto and aero industries, both massive carbon footprint entities, but block oil and gas production and world market access. Hypocrisy is also shutting down coalgeneration in AB while shipping coal through the Port of Vancouver to China and the world to burn. There are thousands of everyday items made from oil.....do you know what they are and have you stopped using products that have an oil component? Thought not!
Michelle Marcus I don't think you understand how much foreign oil is refined in eastern Canada. Much of this oil comes from middle east and African producers with abysmal human rights and environmental records. We spend $18 billion a year importing oil. Why not produce that oil domestically, support our industry and economy, and collect billions more in revenue and carbon taxes for things like healthcare, infrastructure, education, etc. How does it make sense to lock in our fossil fuel supply while importing $18 billion a year from sketchy foreign producers ? I get that oil is a finite, imperfect energy source but lets develop sustainable commercial scale renewable energy BEFORE destroying our industry. In the meantime, pleaseenlighten us as tohow substituting AB crude for foreign terror oil is a bad thing for the environment or ethically.
Michelle Marcus - Additionally oil and gas adds on average $20 billion a year to government coffers. The high was $33 billion in 2008 when oil was selling for well north of $100/ barrel and natural gas was $15/mcf. The NEB has moved the goal posts on TCPL by adding downstream CO2 emissions to the Energy East pipeline review. Meanwhile the federal government ignores the upstream and downstream CO2 emissions from oil imported into eastern Canada. Canada should be thinking globally and displace imported oil with Canadian oil and keep our jobs here and grow the economy. I in no way believe that regimes such as Venezuela, Nigeria and Saudia Arabia accurately report their CO2 and methane emissions. It is naive to think that the world can transition from consuming 95 million barrels a day so Canada needs to be the ethical, environmental supplier to the world. To quote Peter Terzakian "Canada should be the last one out of the pool".
Canada must follow the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples in all future energy considerations. This includes respecting the free, prior and informed consent of Indigenous peoples. Canada has far too long imposed its economy on Indigenouspeoples and destroyed ecologically and culturally significant territory through colonial practices in the energy sector. In short, the energy sector must decolonize.
While colonialism was terrible for the Indigenous, you really underestimate how much oil and gas has benefited them. I'm not sure if you've visited Northern Alberta before, but outside of oil and gas the economic opportunities look very bleak. In 2010, 1700 of the 23000 Indigenous people living around oil sands developments were employedby you guessed it, oil sands producers. Google Jim Boucher, chief of Ft. Mckay First Nation. He is in the heart of oil sands country but is a champion of the industry. Also, it's kind of redundant to say we need to follow a UN Declaration on the rights of Indigenous Peoples in all future energy considerations when the Canadian Indian Oil and Gas Act first came into force in 1977,40 yearsago: IOG Act
Many communities are reliant on the fossil fuel sector and no community or individual should be left behind in the transition to renewables. In order to facilitate a just transition, the Canadian government must retrain workers, support off-grid projects in ruralareas and work with marginalized communities, particularly Indigenous communities. Renewable energy offers huge opportunities for Canadians, but the transition must be facilitated effectively such that itreduces, rather than increases inequalities.
Why not take the best of both the hydrocatbon and renewable energy sources? Why does it have to be one or the other?
Canada must completely decarbonize and transition to a sustainable economy based on renewable energy. Climate change is impacting people locally and globally and its effects will only worsen in years to come. We must act responsibly.
Thus is impossible while maintaining a reasonable standard of living.
It's not impossible, it's something that will literally have to happen eventually, butit's not going to be tomorrow. For example, my car cost me a few grand, costs about $30 to fill, and can go 800km. Any current EV car that I'm aware of is currently $30000+ with poor range. Nissan Leaf is over 30k and you only get 172km from a charge. This is factory specs and battery life will always decline exponentially more-so than fuel economy.I also have serious doubts that these range estimates factors in Canadian heating requirements for winter driving. If I want to visit my family, 480km away, I would actually have to book time off of work because it would take so long to charge the vehicle. With my car Iheadout on friday afternoon after work, I'm there in a few hours for a modest price and can drive home Sunday night. My point is that renewables aren't there yet. Absolutely we will have to phase out oil but lets do it after we have a substitute.
Michelle - I'm assuming you are leading the charge by removing all fossil fuels and their related by products (plastics, etc.) from your life? Your groceries are hauled in by horse and buggy? No more airplane trips?
Canada still follows the climate commitments of the Harper era, which are far weaker than other nations' commitments and do not accurately represent Canada's role in contributing to global climate change. Furthermore, Canada is not on track to meet its current commitments, and the completion of further fossil fuel infrastructure projects would worsen this course. We must play our fair share in tackling climate change by setting and sticking tostrong commitments to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
Our commitments do nothing to change the reality of the world - China, Russia and India are going to keep adding to the pollution of the world. They don't care if their own citizens die, why would they care about the world? Why should Canada cripple our economy, lose thousands of jobs and start relying on foreign oil so that we can appease the corrupt UN? Please tell me why I should suffer so that Canada can be seen as some kind of hero to who? To foreign Environmental groups who spread lies and misinformation regarding our very regulated and safe oil and gas industry? I like heat, I need power - we need these things and wind, solar and hydro are not going to ever totally replace oil and gas. Look around you - everything works/depends on these things.
Develop off-grid renewable technologies that are affordable, reliable and feasible for rural communities. Work with these communities to ensure themost appropriate technologies are implemented.
Remember that these so called "environmentally friendly" energy sources such as wind and solar also come with environmental costs. Such as the loss of birds and bats around wind turbines and the metals and plastics used in solar panels.
Recognizetherights of Canadians to a healthy environment, including a stable climate. Ensure that Canadian lawsalign with these values and do not allow corporations to unjustly file suitsagainst environment/climate policies that impact them. Ensure that trade agreements do not give corporations power over communities/environment/a stable climate.
Also, do not allow American and Russian oil interests to keep paying environmentalists to destroy Canada's ability to be independent in our energy needs and have a healthy economy. People need jobs!
Remember Canada contributes less than 1% to the global pollution that is occurring on this planet. While we should be leaders and push to keep our air and water clean, we can not cripple our economy and stop life as we know it in the hopes that this will stop global warming. It won't as China, India and Russian are pushing harder to increase their economy with no regards to the environment. Countries do not have walls around them - we will be affected by these countries continued ignorance towards air and water pollution. They don't care. Canada should not punish our own citizens in the name of saving the world. We can only save ourselves and we do that by continuing to look for better ways to do things while also becoming independent from foreign oil and supporting our own industries. I like electricity and heat - I don't know about you?
We are going to have a combination of multiple energy sorces. Not just hydrocsrbons and not just renewables...but both used in a sustainable responsible way.
Totally agree! This idea that we can just turn off oil and gas isn't based in reality. We need to do more to reduce pollution, but we need to maintain the ability to access affordable energy! We also need the jobs that these industries support.
There should be an expansion of converting waste into energy. Every major city should employ a waste to energy processing plant. Though the goal is to reduce individuals' carbon footprints through electric cars and solar homes Canada will still require fossil fuels for industrial uses such as plastics and heavy industry so we should use our own oil rather than importing foreign oil. Our regulations are the most stringent in the world and we must consider the ghg costs of transporting foreign oil to our shores. It makes no sense.
Canada has a proud history of developing relatively safe nuclear technology. If we are to reduce our carbon footprint in a responsible manner, we need a source of cheap abundant energy. Thorium is hugely abundant all over the world and can be stockpiled with any possibility of a runaway nuclear reaction. There is a huge amount of research that has been compiled since the 60's when weapons development spawned the current reactor technology in use. Canada needs to commercialize this technology by prioritizing investment in developing this technology! SEE: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thorium-based_nuclear_power  This would open internal industry options with cheap power, invigorate exports, minimize our carbon footprint. ACTION is what is needed from our leaders! Leadership is investing in the future of Canada and the World.
Not only do we need Thorium, a Liquid Fluoride Thorium Reactor (#LFTR) is one of the best ways to do it in my mind. It doesn't deal with Thorium as a solid but rather a liquid which I'm told is much easier to deal with. There is so much reference material out there on LFTR that you can just search it. Kirk Sorensen explains all of it in so many different ways, I feel like I gain a new understanding of it every time I watch a presentation from him. I'll let him explain LFTR better than I ever could on Youtube.  If you're more of a Wiki person here are a couple links you can look at! https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liquid_fluoride_thorium_reactor https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flibe_Energy
This idea that we can just shut off oil and gas is not based in reality. I have heard from those on the far left that we don't need oil and gas - we have wind and solar. In Canada we also have a very cold, dark winter and many times not enough wind. Alberta has very little access to hydro etc. What about those who live in the frozen north? What would they be using all year long? We need to support our oil and gas industries as they are the most regulated and best in the world in terms of protecting the environment. We need to also support new innovations and ideas that can lessen our use of non-renewable sources, without causing energy to become extremely expensive and/or unreliable. 
Totally agree. Our existing energy economy must fuel growth and the transition to a net zero CO2 economy. Natural gas in the logical transition and load leveling fuel. We are going to need more oil for a while for air transportation. We need to be levarage our natural advantages in a similar fashion to other Energy Rich OECD countries, like US and Australia. world leaders in low impact HSSE hydrocarbon exploitation and were only a short way behind China on small scale nuclear energy systems. The future will require a mix of systems and improved
We are a lucky country with abundant energy resources and a high GDP. WE need to exploit those who aren't so lucky by delivering low cost Energy to the highly populated areas of Africa and Asia. (Take a look at the satellite photos of the world at night.) Millions still cook on dangerous antiquated systems or inefficient solid fuels and are unable to read or study after dusk. Our traditional gas customer is now awash with their own fuel, so we need to divert ours to areas with the greatest need. We need the employment for our young people just as they do for theirs. Natural gas is the transition fuel and we are unable to exploit ours.
Canada needs to keep extracting it's oil and gas or we will suffer - our economy will fail and thousands of people will go without heat, energy etc. Never mind how many people will lose their jobs which means less taxes etc. We will become a "have not" nation. I am not willing to see this come to fruition. I support our already over-regulated oil and gas industry. I want to see Canada become an energy independent nation - meaning no more reliance on foreign oil. Why environmentalist thing we can just turn off the tap?? They are not in tune with reality.
Agreed, stop favoring over seas terror oil and build Energy East.
Agreed
Canada has large reserves of oil and gas which will be required for a long time to come. Let's use our own hydrocarbons rather than importing them from other countries. Our federal government seems to be in the business of throwing up roadblocks to stop Alberta and Saskatchewan in their tracks rather than facilitate responsilbe exploitation of our valuable resources.
Climate change is a worldwide problem, like poverty, education, overpopulation, under-employment and equality of opportunity and quality of life. So we have a multiplicity of issues to address simultaneously. Billions of people have very poor access to the safe efficient fuels and the means of transportation that we take for granted, like electricity and natural gas. We have to simultaneously work on a large number of fronts to address these issues....it is not either fossil, nuclear, renewables, or improved energy efficiency, it is all of these things fueled by robust worldwide economic growth. Access to safe and efficient energy for cooking, light, heating/cooling and transport is the a basic human right....So those of us that have abundant low cost energy need to find ways to cost effectively deliver that energy to the growing markets and then use parts of the revenue to do so more efficiently and to steadily drive down CO2, NOX,SOX and particulate emissions. One way to do this in Canada would be to invest some of our Infrastructure funding in getting oil and gas into the world markets instead of primarily exporting to the US. This is the only way to get our relatively clean energy to sub-Saharan Africa and East Asia. Like texas, we should be using more renewables at home in order to export more conventional fuels to others. 
Why is energy industry still fighting for social license for pipelines from West - East ? Quebec still burns 200 million barrels of mostly foreign oil a year. We can substitute domestic oil for environmentally and ethically questionable foreign oil that currently dominates the Eastern refining demand. Valero and Irvingimport oil from primarily middle east and African countries with abysmal human rights and environmental records. It is mind boggling how people can be against Energy East andfavormoving terror oil across oceans instead of utilizing AB crude. I understand that oil and gas is not the energy of the future, butwhy kneecap our own industry when we clearly still rely on it and will for years to come while renewables become more feasible.
Spot on!
Ocean wave energy is highlyforecastable and persistent, compared with other types of renewable energy, and yet it is still in an early development stage. One of the best sources for potential wave energy in the world has been identified on the west coast of Canada. Europe, Asia, and Australia are making huge strides developing ways to harness energy from ocean waves. We should be investing in the future of sustainable energy in Canada, we should be developing cutting edge technology instead of letting other nations beat us to it.
Canada needs access to coastal ports via pipelines from Alberta in order to export its energy resources (coal, oil, gas). Without these pipelines Canada will forever be dependent on the United States.
Canada needs to build pipeline access and/or export terminals in the arctic to be able to take advantage of abundant,clean gas resources.
We needimproved market access for our existing production before we even think about expanding to the arctic.There's way too muchgas in AB, the spot market price this week has been around $1.00 - $1.50 / GJ. This is due to bottle necking and choke points in our export pipelines. America has it's own gas now, and they're constantly upgrading their own pipeline infrastructure sowe have to quit relying on them as oursinglecustomer. Let alone the environmental and logistical challenges of drilling in the arctic.
When we consider our energy development strategy, I believe we need make current (oil & Gas) good and/then diversified energy development. That say we need to construct necessary pipeline to output our oil&gas to the outside world (not only to US), this will not be obstacle to develop solar/wind or other green energy, at least within 30 years. I also think if we can use ourregional advantages, to develop "cold resource", as our winter is other part of the earth's summer, they need a lot energy to convert cold air. (If you are interested can be discussed in depth)
Oil and gas will always be the fuel used in manufacturing, and as a fuel used to generate electricity. These fuels must be transported to these users and to the export markets via pipelines. This will help to ensure we continue to maintain and improve our standard of living. Where we should be focusing our efforts is hydrogen usage, this fuel should be used in all types of vehicles. This fuel is abundant and can,/is used in some automobiles emitting only water. The road we are going down presently is foolish, arguing about pipelines, promoting solar and windmills, believing that electric vehicles are a God sent. If all the talk, policies made, tax payers money wasted on solar and windmills etc. etc was contributed to hydrogen we would global leaders. Instead we are following the road of fools, no pipelines, carbon taxes, Paris Accord, green green etc. etc. Nothing will be accomplished doing as we are, and implementing what is proposed.
We have recently purchased a hybrid vehicle, we recycle, we compost, grow some of our own food and purchase other local as much as possible. We are currently renovating our home, getting a tankless water heater, using sustainable products..getting a bamboo kitchen countertop. We use alot of solar lighting outside as well. Everyone can make a difference, individuals and businesses alike taking all these little steps to create a lesser carbon footprint can make a big impact if everyone participates.
Have less land tax if we utilize solar panneling
I think we should implement various tax incentives for energy saving behaviours. This would be a positive way to engage the Right in these behaviours, which many still don't see as necessary.
i think solar panels should be included on all social housing units therefore those not able to afford to purchase their home can still contribute to providing reusable energy to the areas they live in
Nuclear energy is wasteful and produces significant amounts of waste that is dangerous and non-recyclable. Shut down aging facilities and invest in safe, renewable sources. 
Canada needs more 4th generation nuclear power. Waste from older plants are mostly fuel that can be recycled. Hydro is the next cleanest power. Wind turbines and solar will be expensive and dirty to decommission and both have massive land use change which causes many environmental problems.
We have many natural resources and many other natural ways to generate power. There is no shortage of wind, tide and water. Generate our own power and seek the excess to the states for example and keep our power costs low instead of buying coal for example from another country to produce power when we have more than enough of our own here.
Canada doesn't buy coal. Canada's electricity grid is already 60% renewable due mostly to hydro electricity.
I believe that we should promote Solar Panel Installation programs, and reduce the cost of installing solar panels and give incentive to homeowners for installing it. Solar Energy is very powerful and it can pave a future with low-carbon future for us. The government should implement a law for Auto Companies to lower down the prices of elevctric vehicles so that it can be affordable. Governenment should also arrange community events, trade shows, exhibitions where the residents can come and learn about how small changes in their day to day life can result in improving energy efficiency, reducing greenhouse gases, etc.
Mandatory electric cars
I hope to see more solar power housing options in the future. Also electric and hybrid busses would be great too!
add a description of your idea here
Make exercise equipment that puts energy back into the grid more affordable and accessible.
Hi there  I want CANADA to lead the world in power generation by leverage every item that goes on our dumpsters to either recycle it or generate electricity from it  Germany already is doing this as it buys garbage from its neighboring countries to generate power They also celebrate annually a day of no power shutdowns or blackouts hitch is amazing if we are to mimic this model in Canada  please share this ideas as I believe it can truly revolutionize our lives and for generations to come living garbage free!! Thanks 
1115 does not include the consumer advocacy family committee in the amendment and as a parent.guardian of a consumer of NC Medicaid who is developmentally disabled, the consumer advocacy family committees are very important for the silent voice of the intellectually disabled can be a positive input on changes in the medicaid program.

As a family in Texas who has gone through this change with my medically complex daughter, managed care fails to serve complex children's healthcare needs and puts their lives at risk. It is also not saving the state of Texas money and the transition in Texas should be a fairly good case study in what not to do in other states. Such a transition is hard to reverse, but the transition to MCOs has led families in Texas to lose access to critical care team providers that are the most appropriate specialists for our children's rare and complex needs, experience unnecessary delays and red tape that put the children's lives at risk, and the MCOs were not ready and over a year in are not meeting their contractual obligations to the state daily and the management of MCOs is proving to be a lot more burdensome than the state had anticipated. I urge other states considering similar changes to look for other solutions to cut costs and not choose to unnecessarily put complex children's lives at risk for a program that in unproven and adds complexity and stress for families and children with specialized care needs.

As very concerned parents of a Medically Fragile child who receives Cap C services, we have been working at a federal level and now a state level on behalf of this group of children and adults. This program/waiver should be delayed and excluded to the fullest from changing to Managed Care. This program has kept our child alive, literally, and has been working well as it is. It has been a great blessing to our family. We plead that it not be changed to Managed Care. We plead for it to remain as is and be completely excluded from the rest for this is life and death for this population and needs to be left as it is since it works. Thank you for allowing comments! Sincerely, Pastor James and Lori Brigman (Pastor/Father who walked 400 miles to Washington DC for his Medically Fragile child to bring her voice to Congress in July 2017.)

Attached are the comments of North Carolina AIDS Action Network and the Duke Health Justice Clinic, endorsed by the following organizations: Equality North Carolina Hispanic Health Network Latino Commission on AIDS Latinos in the Deep South North Carolina Harm Reduction Coalition North Carolina Justice Center RAIN Southern HIV/AIDS Strategy Initiative Warren Vance Community Health Center Women's Empowerment Team of the East

For families with employer provided primary insurance and Medicaid as secondary, managed care organizations create problems for finding in-network physicians and getting specialty pharmacy prescriptions filled. Medically complex children need to see a variety of specialists, and managed care provider lists never fully overlap with primary insurance lists. The transition to MCO makes life more difficult for medically complex kids.

 I am a parent who cares about the health of the children of  I oppose the NC Medicaid waiverIt would limit access to quality doctors and services for children.<br>-- It would create much more bureaucracy in NC healthcare.<br>-- It would do away with Community Care of NC (CCNC), which is dedicated to working with doctors and families and has a strong record of saving the state money.

Does this pollute the air though? Would we be burning garbage to create power? I am a little fuzzy on the details
Eat more organic, unprocessed and wholesome foods. Its good for our health and the whole ecological environment.
We can produce energy from following renewable energy sources. I know we can't depend upon solar as much, even though we can use hydro power

Traditional refined petroleumfuels (i.e. motor gasoline, diesel, etc.) provide a significant amount of the energy consumed in Canada today. While they have distinct advantages, (portability as liquids at room temperature, energy density, cost, and existing infrastructure) they pose a significant challenge to reducing net atmospheric Carbon Dioxide emissions. Developing and refining a national energy strategy ought to include an investigationinto the potential of synthetically produced, carbon-neutral (or low net carbon), liquid hydrocarbon-based fuels, produced from carbon extracted from the atmosphere (i.e. syntheticgasoline). Synthetic fuels might have the advantage of being compatiblewith existing energy infrastructure and could be part of a cost-effective transition away from a net carbon-emitting energy market.

There are so many people in Toronto who love biking and would happily bike to work if they felt safer in traffic. Adding a dedicated bike lane separated from traffic along Yonge Street will be very easy because there is already parking along its length which isn't really needed. More bike lanes, less parking, more biking, less driving, happier healthier Torontonians and a cleaner city!
Buying an electric car should have 0% interest for the entire payment term to incentivise more people to purchase Ev's over regular or hybrid vehicles.

Read the article below. If a technology makes sense it doesn't need to have incentives. In a country as large and cold as Canada I think hybrids are the most logical and adoption will happen as more hybrid vehicles reach the resale market so as to be affordable. There are over 1.2 billion ICE's - so Canada shouldn't break the bank to electrify the transportation network for a few electric vehicles. https://www.arcenergyinstitute.com/commentary-why-ban-the-engine/
If we have fuel stations for just diesel vehicles than how does that impact vehicles on the road. It does a lot and so with less gas stations for diesel cars as quickly as possible than for some people it will be far to reach there and so there only other alternative is by electric car and it must also be affordable especial for low income families.
Raise awareness of this issue and start taking action early on by educating students on it in schools. Teach them what they can do differently starting today and the impact their action will have on our environment.
Put a ban on plastic bags.
Active commuting, transporting, vacations and errands can be daunting for people. To enable us to be less reliant on cars and airplanes, people need training, positive reinforcement and marketing of the idea. Government money should be spent on promoting active transportation and the use of mass transit. Separated ike lanes might be too costly so safe biking courses and education as part of driving training might be better use of funds. Please fund cycling classes, change policy to support active transportation and market active vacations to reduce emissions and improve health.
We need more turbines in coastal waters

It is a concern of mine that the current waiver for Medicaid will make access to care more difficult for the 2 out of 5 children in NC who rely on this coverage for their healthcare. Making participation harder with complicated rules, procedures and measures -- or rules, procedures and measures that dont make sense for children -- will substantially reduce access in our state. Currently my suburban practice has about 25% of our patients taking Medicaid. 

I am in total support of the new amendments on this bill to provide behavioral and mental health support for certain populations. It will benefit everyone.	


I am the parent of a medically fragile child in NC and I do not support this change. See the response submitted by Advocates for Medically Fragile Kids

If payment is reduced, or capped, or if payment is delayed or difficult, my practice will have to make a decision financially to cap our medicaid enrollment or we could face financial peril. We are fortunate that we could limit our medicaid population and still stay solvent. Colleagues of mine across the state could not.

I am the parent of a medically fragile child on the CAP/C waiver. She has primary private insurance with Medicaid secondary. Having to navigate networks for both our private insurance and a Medicaid PHP/MCO would limit the ability to fully use private insurance benefits should her providers not be in-network for both. Worse would be that she might not be able to access the care she needs when she needs it. Having to jump through unnecessary hoops would delay treatment, which could literally cost her her life. She takes over a dozen medically necessary prescription drugs each day, many of which have to be compounded at a specialty pharmacy. 

It is unclear to me in the waiver application how access to prescriptions would be handled, but if controlled by PHP/MCOs, access would likely be limited, just as it will be to providers. Because she has a rare disease, the ability to go outside of our possible PHP/MCO geographical catchment area to access appropriately skilled providers is needed. Denying her quick access to members of her care team could be fatal. 


Managed care has proven to be bad for NC in the past, and it is bad for NC in the future. I strongly oppose NC moving Medicaid to managed care. Medicaid as fee-for-service in NC works & is cost-effective too. As the saying goes, "If it ain't broke, don't fix it until it is." If they do it, however, CAP/C, CAP/DA, and the TBI waivers must be excluded. Additionally, I support full Medicaid expansion in NC and do not support work requirements or premiums. Also, the state already does a poor job of fully engaging beneficiaries and families in a manner that would allow us to best inform them for policy-making & program improvement purposes. Managed care would make that worse.


I have a medically involved child on Medicaid and live in New Mexico, which has managed care. Managed care has created problems for us as the MCO changes its contracts with providers. For instance the first specialists my son saw ordered a swallow study, but the hospital where the specialist worked refused to perform it because they didn't take our insurance (MCO) even though the specialist did. So we had to get a referral to have it done at another hospital from our pediatrician, who - not being a specialist in that area- did it WRONG and my son received the wrong test. 

In Michigan, when managed care was required, not every plan had to provide nursing, so disabled children who needed private duty nursing were given "straight" (non-managed-care) medicaid, and then had to argue about it every time they came up for renewal. For families like this who have a primary private insurance and medicaid as secondary, having 2 managed care plans arguing over what doctors you can see and how procedures will be paid for is a mess.	

I am the parent of a medically fragile child in North Carolina and I have concerns that the move to managed care would not address the needs of children like mine. We have learned that children with complex medical needs as a rule do not follow any template and must be supported on an individualized basis.

e are deeply concerned about moving Medicaid in North Carolina from a fee-for-service model to managed care. It would reduce and complicate overall access to healthcare, add administrative burden for providers, and has not been shown in any major study to reduce costs. Moving Medicaid to managed care in NC is especially concerning with the issues surrounding unscrupulous actions of one of our current LME/MCOs (Cardinal Innovations). An uncertain future at the federal level regarding the ACA, Medicaid, and CHIP makes the move to managed care even more worrisome. Any changes to these programs will significantly impact NC and its ability to ensure the well-being of its citizens.

Please reconsider the move to managed care and certainly exclude persons enrolled in CAP/C, CAP/DA and TBI waivers. Please also advocate for deeper stakeholder collaboration in the systems.

I am particularly concerned about a system that would trap us into regions for receiving care. Our childrens diagnoses are so rare that we are lucky if their is an accessible specialist in the country, much less Raleigh. We need support to see the doctors who fit our needs regardless of geography.

As parents of Medically Fragile children, we save the state money. It would be exponentially more expensive to house our children in a hospital or institution. Of course, we also want our son to live with us. In order to do that safely, we create hospital-like settings and coordinate with multiple agencies and service-providers. Its a difficult job that we do on top of our paid jobs, on top of our parenting, on top of our own pursuits and obligations. We are happy to do this for our children, but we certainly dont need it to be more difficult.

I am very concerned about moving Medicaid in North Carolina from a fee-for-service model to managed care. It would reduce and coate overall access to healthcare, add administrative burden for providers, and has not been shown in any major study to reduce costs. Moving Medicaid to managed care in NC is especially concerning with the issues surrounding unscrupulous actions of one of our current LME/MCOs (Cardinal Innovations). An uncertain future at the federal level regarding the ACA, Medicaid, and CHIP makes the move to managed care even more worrisome. Any changes to these programs puts my daughter in real danger.

As a mother and advocate I implore you to work towards keeping managed care out of the conversation. Please consider the best care we can give our children and disabled, not the cheapest.

Please please do not make changes to our Medicare system with regards to medically fragile children. We live this life each day and sometimes (more often than not) it is a hard struggle. Being able to receive and manage excellent care is critical for our children and our families. Please do not make the burden HARDER for us to care for our children that we love so deeply!	

They changed our pharmacy with short notice and some of my son's numerous medications did not transfer over, we eventually got them but it was unnecessarily complicated and delayed refilling some of his medicines, which could be fatal for some children. We've had the ER send for a non contracted DME to bring my son oxygen in the middle of the night, and had to give the oxygen back. These are just a few examples. I hope you will consider the needs of the medically complicated and disabled population in your decision.

I've seen the reports of the crises that are occurring in other states who've moved Medicaid to managed care. Why is NC doing this to us, especially when one of the LME/MCOs here (Cardinal Innovations) has already shown us all just what a bad idea managed care is? It does not save money (look how much Cardinal misused!), especially in providing care for people with medically complex needs, and it most definitely does not improve care...just talk with impacted consumers and their families for a change instead of legislators or even DHHS staff. To see, read, and hear real life examples of the devastation that comes with managed care, visit this website to see what's happening in Texas:

Inadequate or delayed payments will hurt access. When children dont have access to the right care and at the right time, both their immediate health and their longer-term health trajectories can be compromised.

I think it should be a forced thing when it comes to the environment. Everyone should have to trade in their cars for electric ones. Its basically a crime what we are doing to the environment. People need to smarten up and make a change.
Provide incentives for people to use solar/geothermal/wind energy. Support more businesses to carry products and gather this info where it can easily be found so people can find it. Require all new buildings to have some portion of heating/water be solar/rain collection (for toilets etc) as renewable resources. Same for new apartments/houses etc. Make solar panels etc AFFORDABLE!
Make sure all of us are in the same mind set.

More net zero home building incentives. Tax benefits for green homes, tax penalties and prohibitions on cheap poorly built/poorly insulated/lazily engineered mass built townhomes and condos. Increased renovation incentives for increasing the efficiency of homes. More education opportunities for trades and contractors on best practices for green home building.
government should put new wind and solar energy example is to have wind in our back yards and new technology that allows energy derived from plants pavements, roadsand steps

There isn't a lot of free space in the city - at least, not at the street level! By creating green spaces on rooftops, not only do you grow more plants (which abdorbs carbon dioxide) and help our local pollinators, but you can also make the city space brighter and more vibrant, and also provide home-grown food for the local community! There is also potential for the use of a compost system to help reduce organic waste and give the gardens nore nutrients.

Incentivize or subsidize contractors and home builders to build more energy-efficient and/or zero-emission homes.
Provide education and incentives for people to make use of smart home energy systems, which automatically turn on or off depending on temperature settings and which can be adjusted (eg powered off) remotely through mobile devices.
Let's get moving on the sustainable roads that are being researched right now, especially in the north.
There is enrgy in waves. If turbines could be set up along strategic points along our coastlines the energy produced from the waves can be fed into our power systems. I do believe there is some that have been set up along the eastern coast.
This idea involves everyone to install Solar panels to their homes. This will allow all homes to generate their own power and become self sufficient.
Well you see the flaps and the rudder of an airplane if those were made of solar panels we would get a good amount of energy. The rudder works east to west and the flaps work when its behind the sun.
Often a middle or lower class household can not afford these energy efficient programs however in the long run by lowering their monthly bills these could benefit them the most. We need to make these programs accessible to all regardless of class if we are to succeed in lowering our emissions.
Being in Canada means dealing with snow. Cities need a plan to encourage more people to walk to destinations or at least to public transit. Those plans can include more paths to keep neighbourhoods connected, wider roads and more sidewalks. Once the infrastructure is in place it needs to be cleared regularly and quickly when it snows.
Reduce number of children people are having
Placing turbines in our grey water system. As water leaves our homes in the city it turns the turbines generating power. Bam!
There needs to be more bike lanes for people to get around on their bicycles. Where I live there is a lot of people who ride bikes but it is very unsafe to have them in the driving lanes when traffic needs to keep moving. There should also be classes taught about proper bike safety. People I cars need to learn to share the road and the same with cyclists.
Have a requirement that all new builds must be equipped with solar panels. This would include private, as well as commercial buildings. The power from the panels would work similarly to how it does now; whatever is required for use in a particular building is used at a reduced or no rate, the surplus is sent into the grid. Extra energy could be purchased, if needed.
Have newer houses be made with solar panels
Make it safer for people to get around on their bikes in the city. Build more cycling infrastructure!
Not a new idea but a crucial one. Create better opportunities to keep the Elons of the world in Canada. We spend millions of dollars advertising to the world that Canada is the place to be, only to lose them when Easy VC money comes knocking.
Put a ban on the use of plastic bags.
Design homes to use less power. Using solar panels on roofs (or shingles that are solar panels) to provide energy for power walls located in the home. The solar panels would help to keep the power wall charged, and the power wall could be programmed to kick in at peak energy use times during the day.
Using this method of power generation makes it less centralized and gives people the ability to fall off the grid but still have energy. Not all regions in our country get the best amount of sunshine so if homes can't benefit from the sun then they should have to use wind turbines. The Tesla Power Wall should be in every home as they can reduce the load on the grid as they charge during off peak hours and drain during peak.
I agree with other posts that new homes should be built with solar panels without making the cost high. We need to have affordable living aswell as my millenial generation has a hard time finding affordable living.  Furthermore, if there is to be an increase in hybrid vehicles there should be more recharge stations so that more people can access it.
I drive a BEV ( only battery) and if there were more Level 3chargers available especially in small towns and along more highways more people might be able to think about switching how they drive.
if people had access to a service that was free they would be more likely to use it then drive
This would definitely encourage more use of public transportation!
We need more woodsy area like Wismer Park where humans and animals alike can find shelter and be able to exercise outdoors no matter the weather. The more dense the trees, the less it matters if it rains. Trees recycles CO2 to oxygen, So it is also good for air quality too. We shouldn't have to travel far to exercise in natural shade. Every community should have an area with dense trees like Wismer. Most new communities cut down mature trees to build homes. Maybe we can plant more trees at the playgrounds so that we can get shades if required. This way, people can stay out even during midday sun.
We rely on innovation from other countries for new renewable energy technology. We have specific energy needs that we know best. We should have the government invest more in smaller and mid-size renewable energy companies that do R&D, and make it easier for start-ups getting into renewable energy. This way we make jobs, advance the technology, and maybe sell products to other countries and grow our economy.
Get the pipelines approved and use the benefits of a strong economy to invent the energy solution here in Canada.
Would suggest to reduce the prices of electric cars to make them affordable
Make it prohibitive to own wood burning furnaces 
Not so fast. Trudeau is hellbent to eliminate fossil fuels so I'd hang onto as much furniture as you can because pretty soon we'll be burning it to stay warm if drama teacher gets his way.
Having access to intercity buses and trains at a cost that is cheaper than the cost of has to drive one person to the same destination. I have looked at options of travelling to another city by train or bus and the cost is easily 3 or 4 times more expensive than driving, and that is for only one person. I cannot afford taking that option and then having to rearrange my schedule to account for the extra time needed to use public transportation. Also the schedules to get to different places take a long time. Did you know it takes almost 3 hours to travel from Hamilton to Kitchener? It is less than an hour drive and two fairly large cities. And if you live anywhere north west of Waterloo, there are practically no viable options except to drive.
If more plots of green space were provided, more lower income homes would have access to free fruits and vegetables. The only stipulation is that if you take from the garden, you contribute to its upkeep.
Have a better bus system that has expanded hours for those outside normal working hours and better service for those who work in the east end have large corporations offer free bus passes to reduce cars on roads
I feel like everything is car-centric. All roads are for cars first and very little infrastructure is given to bikers and people commuting in different ways. Why can there not be dedicated roads for bikers and walkers only? Why do all roads have to be for cars?
We need our current home owners enticed to WANT to change their home. If it costs too much they wont do it. If its only for certain products which are available to few or to the more affluent it wont work. Think products which will have ALL factions of our culture be able to make the changes, NOT only the higher classes.
Bigger Government Programs with a better return There is literally no such thing.
I am from New Brunswick, home to the highest tides in the world and I really do not understand why we are not harnessing the amazing energy provided by this natural phenomenon. Unlike wind and solar, tides are naturally constant and predictable.
Invent household garbage bins that encourage more recycling and collection of compost - think zero waste
Connect cardio machines to generate energy for the grid
London taxes vehicles driven within the city limits. This reduces traffic, thus pollution and generates income which can be used for clean energy research and projects. Cities over 1 million people in population should implement this via cameras like the 407. Public transportation would not be affected.
extend the deadline for solar subsidies
Discourage vehicle use by making some areas pedestrian only, ie major shopping, tourist areas
Create a policy to ensure all consumer product packaging is made from recycled materials.
use seaweed from the ocean to generate electricity
Develop a plan to add charging stations to major cities and highway routes to promote support for electric cars.
just as we are moving more towards the use of hybrid cars as a means of saving energy, we should start utilising these energy efficient vehicles in public transport. dditionally , creating more bus routes and easier access to public transport will encourage more people to use this as a means of transportation.
Consumer incentives for purchasing fuel efficient and green energy vehicles
Personally, I believe that there should be incentives for car buyers. The problem is the large manufacturers of the vehicles that are regular gasoline operating do not habe the finances, large enough incentives, which cannot be delayed to the consumers. Thus, the high pro e or vehicles and gasoline. There needs to be a mindset change and enforcement of the up and coming vehicle emission restrictions. There will need to be reasonable prices on the vehicles, the batteries, the maintenance for society to change from regular gasoline.
We are bringing attention to the global warming , educating everyone about how we would benefit from it , and how the future would benefit from it . We have days like earth hour and earth day where we cut back on our carbon footprint .
More parks or community gardens
Every single new build must exceed current energy standards and include solar, wind, geothermal, etc power, have green/living roofs with organic gardens for food production and pollinators, use grey water systems, energy efficient appliances, windows, insulation and heating/cooling systems and on-demand hot water tanks. NO EXCEPTION!!! Net-zero construction...
Whatever is done needs to be automatic and affordable. If people are given the option to do something green that requires a slight bit of effort, they won't do it. But if you don't give them an option then everyone will be that much closer to actually helping the environment.
My idea is use the solar power. Solar city, solar power equipped government buildings I.e solar powered airport in Cochin India . 
Integrate sustainability and climate conscious attitudes into education at all levels. Encourage innovation in science and technology and have government, industry, and academic collaboration to come up with innovative multi disciplinary solutions to the climate change challenges facing us globally.
Education is essential in developing new skills. I am an education advocate. The mindset needs to expand with regards to online learning. There is a perspective that it is not an adequate form of learning and at times is deemed as not equilavent to attending a bro l and mortor school. Being innovative and creating online schooling with accreditatez degrees and diplomas can be an energy saver for the community and society, as a whole. The mindset needs to change because of the energy savings and schooling that people can receive. I just completed an MBA degree program. Due to current mindsets of online schooling there are limited doctorate programs online. Educating people is important to society and supporting communities. With the global strategy to make changes within certain timeframes will be essential to train people within the energy discipline to keep moving forward with the strategies. 
Create a self generation program to power small nearby communities with the methane produced by the landfill in the decomposition process
More bike lanes, less parking, make parking more expensive, more public transport, cheeper transit, tax city driving.
I would like to propose to eliminate the flyers that we get in mail boxes every week.  it can benefit businesses that advertise and municipalities that collect the flyers and put it in the garbage.  it will make consumers more aware of the prices available in each store and save monies for the consumers. It will also save time for the consumer to be able to build a better shopping experiences  it is also very simple and doable and fun for the users.
Schools use a lot of energy and feed a lot of students, schools can be more environmentally friendly by installing solar panels and mini wind turbines, they can also invest in greenhouses or gardens that grow food for the students. By doing this school would require less money for energy and food that way money for education can be put into other programs and also be used for new books, equipment, and the renovation of older schools in low income communities.
Provide courses on public transportation like the GO service where educating the public does not have to drive to post secondary institutions in order to enhance their knowledge. They can learn on the GO during their morning or evening commute. Learning pit stop tutors would be available at specific GO stations to help students with their studies.
We have raised awareness about climate change and how it is a global issue . We educate people on how changing their daily habits for the good will not only benefit them , but the planet , and the future . We have days like earth hour and earth day where we can contribute to combatting global warming and reduce our carbon footprint .
New Electric cars can be outfitted with paint that has solar power technology built within the paint that should be Used in the current configurations also all new homes should be billed with solar panel tiles all walls should be built with 2x 6 construction and R20Insulation
There needs to be an annual event where each Canadian citizen plants a tree
Planning large non-long term solar farms is not the answer. Many decisions toward energy efficiencies should consider how we live everyday. Homes are being built without including solar energy, energy efficient devices etc. Also get rid of plastic!
Meat is a non-renewable resource. Even though you can kill and raise as my animals as you want it is not sustainable. To produce meat products takes up so many resources and takes up so much space. I think that meat should either be elminated from most grocers or large price increase to turn people away from it. There should also be classes that people can access either in person or online to be able to learn about eating a plant based diet.
The power of the individual to create a cleaner environment is crucial. Missing from the dialogue about a more environmentally friendly Canada by 2030 is the piece about smokers and second hand smoke. I feel so passionately about this because public smokers not only pollute the airways but they also increase cancer risk in innocent passerby including expectant mothers and people with respiratory illnesses. The littering of the environment with cigarette butts is another risk/concern. Let's take the necessary steps to include this as part of the change and let us lead by example and start with policy makers and leaders who themselves are addicted to nicotine via cigarette smoking.
i think communities of tiny homes should be allowed in Canada. To be able to have a tiny home would be my dream. To be able to help the environment as best as we can. Homes are just getting bigger not everyone wants to live in a large home
Approval of the Energy East Pipeline which mostly uses an empty unused TCPL pipeline will eliminate the importation of oil from Saudi Arabia, Venezuela and Nigeria which have all abysmal human rights records, improve our balance of trade and create many high paying jobs in depressed New Brunswick. It will also gain access to higher prices in offshore markets for crude and refined products reducing the American's monopoly on our exported oil. Canadians should be made aware that Big US Oil discounts the price of our oil because we have no alternative but to sell to them at a reduced price. A gas pipeline to the Pacific from NW Alberta and NE BC should also be built to mitigate the US, our only export market, dictating the price and to take advantage of higher world prices for LNG.
I think we should keep our oil & gas. Refine it all in Canada. Eliminating the need to buy from other countries. Sell off what we can spare / don't need. It's like our homes, buy what we need. Don't spend on what we don't need to spend on.
Canada should be energy self sufficient and an exporter of lower carbon fuels to replace coal such as oil and natural gas in the short term and uranium and thorium for long term. While working on next gen nuclear power generation.
Just like we push kids to be doctors and lawyers we need to make it so going into a career creating clean energy is something every student wants to do.
I agree, that children should be more aware, about clean energy.
Make it easier for the common person to do solar energy. We are currently jumping through provincial government paperwork hoops to put panels on our roof. Insentive plans would help more people to commit.
A minimum requirement of R 30 on new construction and R 20 for retrofitting existing buildings ..
Cheaper living = happy motivated people = better, more ideas = great managable future
More incentive to use public transp/biking/walking. Use more solar power in public places and increase awareness
You should have more info sessions so more people will know how to be energy efficient
Review building code compliance to require a higher level of sustainability - ie requiring solar
Changing the building code is a great idea. At the same time there should be government programs that encourages solar & wind polar, and makes it easy to implement. I took advantage of the Ontario energy program about 7 years ago and installed a geothermal furnace, put in energy efficient windows and upgraded my insulation. I could not have afforded it otherwise. If there was a similar program for solar I would jump on it.
It takes 441 gallons of water to produce 1lb of beef. That's equal to 60 showers! Go vegan for the planet.
Canada should move towards the elimination of single use plastics, our country is surrounded by TWO beautiful oceans and it is crucial that we protect them! Our single use plastics(including and especially grocery bags) end up in our oceans and are eaten by marine life.
Great idea, there is no need for single use plastics and they simply end up in the landfill. Let's start by eliminating bottled water- our tap water is great!
Yes! Is it so difficult to use reuseable water bottles? Plastic simply isn't helping.
we need to not only electrify passenger rail on services like GO Transit and via rail but also on our freight lines. Using renewable energy to power it all reduces even futher
Current technology permits on a chip making nanobubbles. If the bubble can be filled with a reactant, then popped in the laminar flow of another reactant, then you can heat the chip to make energy and control thermal runaway. The trick then is deciding what reactant to use. Chemistry in the nano scale is completely different. Boil water, run turnbines. Clean energy if the resulting reactant can be recycled.
since the government wants us to go green they should go green first to encourage everyone else to begin. Since many already do use TTC, those who don't may consider this choice instead of driving their own cars, if they know that the TTC is an even more eco-friendly choice.
TTC fleet should be full electric by now.
-make public transit more affordable and practical -focus more on hydroelectric energy-make an affordable train system that encourages citizens to take train for long distances-encourage biking in cities by making SAFE bike paths  
offer a tax credit to incentivize people to purchase hybrid or electric vehicles. This will help to remove carbon emissions from our environment
More trees = more clean air
Agreed! If only people had an incentive to grow more trees.
I wish people took the pine beetle problem more seriously.
Through business we can get people to adopt lifestyles that will help Canada reach its climate goals. Incentives work wonders and awareness helps a lot. We have seen this model work for breast cancer awareness, black lives matter and other causes where citizens are involved and interested in making a difference. I got to this page through an app called "carrot" with the incentive of gaining scene points (for free movies) for filling out a survey. Simple way of getting people to spend time on important issues that they'd likely otherwise turn away from. Of course, this will take a lot more brainstorming and planning but I think the more people who know and are aware, the more resources this team will have to really push this goal. Let me know if I can be of any help!
One of the most important things to help move sustainable energy forward is to stop the monopoly of the energy companies in the energy sector. These companies are in it to make money, not to advance the future toward zero emissions. As long as there are legal entities whose sole purpose is to grow and survive through profit, there won't be true innovation because they will try to snuff it out. It's been done before on countless occasions. If greed wasn't such a hurdle to innovation, we would be so much further ahead in terms of technological innovation. Energy "companies" should be non-profit or community funded. The people and the government should manage the energy sector instead of being managed BY the energy sector. Energy is just one (very important) piece of the puzzle, and until we fix the root of the problem, all those great ideas might never come to fruition or at least not fast enough. Basically, to truly move the clean energy movement forward we need to tackle the corporate greed and power issue first. That means having a government that actually works FOR the people first. It seems like a harsh reality, but somewhere everybody knows it's true. Solution: Change our way of thinking and work together. Then the energy sector can truly change. Good day and good luck fellow citizens.
I dont feel that the large corporations care about the individuals who pay into them nor the environment. I support this idea.
Build wind turbines in Canada's windiest region. Make them sturdy enough to harness the hurricane-force winds!
Windmills are an excellent idea given all of our ocean front.
Excellent idea! Newfoundland has lots of wind that should be harnessed!
Invest in youth ideas
I think we should encourage the electrification of commercial vehicles such as trucks used in long haul freight industry. These types of vehicles are always being used in huge volumes all across country much like taxis and public buses. Using subsidies from carbon taxes and other road pricing mechanisms to find the same subsidies to help make these vehicles wide spread. Spur Canada to become a huge exporter of these kinds of electric vehicles in North America.
During the night the traffic lights turn Green if you're driving close to it to save from having the car sit at a red light. The escalators run slow and when you are on it they speed up. In every building the lights turn off in the halls n lobby until someone comes or you can turn it off yourself. / The Carrot App is great. Have it advertise more. Make a commercial. It's a great way and it actually has me more educated in a quick way, has me walking more and its points towards my scene card to get to watch free movies. Great app need more of this. Millenials and generation x will enjoy this.
Build a series of nuclear power production plants along the northern shores of Hudson Bay. This should allow for earthquake proof power generation while basing the stations far enough away from major population centres ensuring that the general population doesn't get up in atms about potential health fears.
Allow more residences to become energy independent and also allow them to sell back power to the grid. Do not limit the number of people able to do this as is currently the case in Newfoundland
i agree with allowing more residences to become energy independent, what is also like to see is the government being more pro-active to inform the people on how to participate, and costs that could be involved and even allow subsidies or grants to help people, renewable energy from people put back into the grid instead of taken from grid will only help to strengthen it, produce less emissions and stop power outages, if i knew more and could get grants to put up solar panels to energize my house I would.
Our children should be learning about ways to be environmentally effecient in the schools. It should be a regular part of the curriculum. We should teach our children that the Earth needs to be cared for and respected. We can do this with our personal recycling, energy effecient lifestyles, and a commitment to preventing extinction in the animal world.
Transportation is something that affects all of us. We need to create more affordable and energy efficient transportation options. Most people don't like taking the bus or subway. So for those people, we need more options that allow for convenient transportation while remaining energy efficient. We need hybrid and electric vehicles to be less expensive than gas and diesel vehicles. A government rebate and/or tax credit for people making these purchases, including ebikes, would be a great incentive. We also need to expand ride share programs. We should push Uber and taxi companies to expand ride sharing. Transportation is something that everyone can relate to. More affordable options are a must.
Every small change toward a cleaner future counts.
Major subsidies for development, manufacturing and most importantly purchase of electric Cars, solar panels and other renewable energy devices
Having a cleaner source of energy for all things we use and efficiently
Lesley- don't you pay enough taxes already? Subsidies come right out of your pocket and go into someone else's pocket. I'm really no interested in that scheme.
I propose a far more strict set of requirements for packaging of food and goods. Some simple issues that can be easily resolved are; switching from black plastics to other more recyclable plastics. As in some areas like Toronto black plastic cannot be recycled or is not accepted. This creates an incredible amount of garbage from things like takeout containers etc.

 Secondly, many food packages could be changed to a reusable or recyclable package instead of the non-recyclable packaging on items like chips for example.  
To save energy on transportation, moderately sized cities should have a mass transit system, such as a train or a monorail. This transportation system should rely on renewable energy, such as solar power, and should be automated to reduce costs. By placing stations in strategic areas with few stops that are connected to a robust bus system, the monorail could gain speeds that would make it economical to ride, and even quicker than driving a personal vehicle.  

Further transportation options should be available at monorail stations, like bike sharing and ride sharing as well as parking lots equipped with electric charging stations.  Clustered around the monorail stations should be farmers markets and grocery stores, as well as community centres, schools and senior's centres. By making monorail stations community hubs, not only is transportation easier, but people have more incentive to use transportation and community services.
I love it, this is a great idea!


In the late 90s and early 2000s there was a bit of interest in using passive solar energy for homes. That interest seems to have dropped off, likely in the interest of more economical construction and cookie-cutter design. This seems like an area that could be incentivized, in terms of offering discounts on products like insulated concrete wall systems, thermal flywheels, and smart window systems. Grants for passive solar design-builds could be offered, either to the consumer, or better yet, to enterprising design builders, who can use their marketing to promote this type of home.
Incentivise Canadians to go solar with programs similar to the Microfit program in Ontario.
 I think every solar panels should be a standard package available and/or mandatory on every new home built. Especially in densely packed subdivisions. If we have to lose farmland to a sea of houses... I would like to see some solar generation to offset a bit of that loss. Solar panels should be cheap and available to any interested family. 
Ensure it is an important part of the curriculum. I see so many kids who do not even know how to recycle.
Completely agree!!
I think environmental issues should be a discussion topic in classrooms around the world. In elementary school I think reduce reuse recycle should be a main focus to help them become Eco friendly Canadians when tthey grow up and to make that the default from a young age.
Solar panels for rural residents, help them get off grid and ease their hydro bills. Start with seniors and those on lower incomes.
An excellent idea. As a "rural senior" with an older (160 yrs plus) house with electric heating, I can relate to this, having paid $400-600 monthly bills to Hydro One.
Provide grants and tax incentives for installing wind ,solar and ground thermal energy generation systems to rural proprty owners.
i ink we should have solar panels everywhere and have that the default source for energy. To spread this idea, places that use solar energy as opposed to fossil fuels should have a lower tax rate on their energy
Similar to the Carrot Rewards App, people are motivated by incentives. I have definitely increased my walking and have used less transportation because of the step goal incentive to earn scene points. But what if we used that same idea but in a bigger way when it comes to reducing carbon footprints? Such as tax reductions when you install solar panels or use less water. I hope that in the next couple decades we are able to transform our neighbourhoods and communities into super bike friendly areas where it would then seem silly to use a car to get around. So tax breaks, even companies offering more benefits to their employees who bike to work. Kind of like a trade off, but overall helping the environment and sustaining this earth!
Isn't a lot of energy consumption coming from industry. So it won't matter how we conserve.

i fully believe that the earth has the full potential to renew itself. It may need a little help on our part to achieve that potential. If we all reduce reuse and recycle. If we all turno off our electricity when it's not fully needed. If we listen to what nature is already telling us. If we follow Gods Word, the holy bible , God has given us so many retroactive ideas that we can use to assist in repairing the earth. Let's not wait for the time that God will step in, let's start the process ourselves. We can all chip in what we have and it will go a long way.

Make solar panels more affordable for the general public. Turn our schools into greener buildings by utilizing their roofs as solar panel installation areas. Use the energy to power the schools and surrounding areas.
I think Tesla roofs should be available for everyone, whether that means a discount on taxes or monetary help to everyone to get one. It would help make the transition easier for those who would not be able to afford it, while doing the right thing for the world!

Every school should have a mandatory Energy course 101. There are many ways to improve energy efficiency and students should be made aware of them. For example - instead of using high energy filament bulbs, they should teach students of using LED bulbs instead. There are many more techniques to reduce energy and students should be educated on them.
I live in Toronto and the amount of cars on the road are astonishing so we should make it only electric cars on the road, make them cheaper and more affordable and have only those cars allowed on the road

I don't understand and have yet to get a reasonable explanation of how taxing carbon will help the environment
I agree, especially as governments try to make it revenue neutral by giving it back to the poor. This has no impact on consumption for the rich and the bonus for the poor allows them to afford a car. It does help with popularity though as there are more poor than rich.

My husband and I would love to use solar, wind, maybe even bio thermal energy for our home. We try really hard to live as green as we can. But converting our home from oil to something greener is just too big a cost upfront for us right now. There should be programs to help people convert their homes so it's more affordable. We would certainly do it!
I propose instead of investing in more nuclear power plants that leave harmful waste governments invest with home and commercial properties to install new technologies that harvest the sun to power our community (i.e. Tesla new solar roof for homes). Instead of an energy bill we pay a fee to pay down the debt incurred by putting the new resources in place until its paid down. If a repair is needed that gets tacked on to the initial dept. and make payments similar to what that property would have paid the hydro company. So people are not out money to install and benefit from green energy right away. Using Tesla roof looks almost like a regular roof so it's not an eye sore, government earns there money back through payment and interest or tax however people are paying an amount they are already paying. So it's an easy sell and everyone is happy Oh ya and the excess energy produced gets sold to say the USA and now our energy is making money to make our economy stronger using green energy. Just a thought 
as a boilermaker I am worried that my apprenticeship is leading to a dead end as coal is phased out in Canada. But I saw that there is a molten salt reactor being tested in Nevada. Canada should be experimenting with our own new technologies like the molten salt reactor and putting our union trades to work. They already have the training facilities and apprenticeship programs to learn the new technologies.
The more dark colours our planet has the more heat from the sun we retain, the more white surfaces we have the more heat we reflect. If shingle manufactures produce white roof top shingles, that would be a lot of sun we would be reflecting back into space. We could also have white roads. We could plant more trees to eliminate more co2 from our atmosphere. Save the marshes and the wetlands, not just for thier beauty but also for the oxygen they produce. If electric cars are going to take off, then there would have to be a more developed infrastructure to charge them, not just a couple of dozen quick charging stations in Ontario. I recently bought a car and that fact alone discouraged me from making that choice. And lastly less wastage, how much co2 do garbage trucks produce? And plastic and styrofoam never decompose because there is nothing organic in thier chemical makeup. So they will break down into a fine sand over millions of years and literally occupy our planet until the sun turns into a red giant. The garbage inside a garbage bag will also not decompose because in order for that to happen, the object must be surrounded by soil and the bag might stay in tact. Plus old food creates methane gas when it decomposes while exposed to air, which is ten times worse than co2 for the environment.
All new builds should integrate solar panels for energy use. If every balcony and roof with sun exposure had solar panels, I think Toronto condos could be self sustaining.
Ride bicycles more. 'Nuff said.
I take the 410 everyday. Congested everyday. I work 18 km from my office in Mississauga from brampton. My commute time is 40 minutes in the AM, evenings approx 35-50minutes. the problem is the transport trucks, they take too long to get to a proper cruising speed slowing down general traffic, making the 410 congested; then making drivers aggressive - in turn causing accidents. the solution? I suggest a truck lane only, designated to trucks only, offenders will be ticketed. It should not take 30 minutes min daily to go less than 20km. The emissions from unecessary idling in cars is outrageous.
Educate and have campaigns to encourage reusing things. No need to keep up with others. Be less of a theow away society..
Regulate times during the day when lights are turned off
Stop eating so much bacon and other meats .. Go vegan or vegetarian a few days a week...
mmmm.. Bacon!
Educate children at an early age about renewable energy and what they can do to reduce their own cabin footprint in schools and by parents.
I think the brainwashing program is already well entrenched.....
I would love to see the industrialization of our food end. Stop supporting Monsanto. Stop supporting large slaughter houses and support local farmers. Make our clean local food affordable. Turn our food industry on it's head. It doesn't work for us.
Subsidies and r&d grants for solar efficiency development, and generation appliance development, for example solar roofing shingles. Followed by manufacturer subsidies and Consumer rebate subsidies.
Install reflective squares/marks along road lines (e.g. white dotted or yellow lines) so they will show road when cars drive on it and lit up by headlights. Many road lights do not provide adequate light and is a waste of electricity. It costs more to maintain and adds too much light pollution.
TECHNOLOGY ALREADY EXISTS TO CONSTRUCT HOMES WITHIN CANADA WITHOUT ANY FORM OF SUPPLEMENTAL HEAT BEYOND THAT PROVIDED BY HUMAN ACTIVITY AND NECESSARY USES SUCH AS HEATING WATER AND COOKING. THERE IS NO NEED FOR A FURNACE OR OTHER FORMS OF HEATING. I WOULD LIKE THIS TO BE A STANDARD FOR ALL NEW HOUSING IN CANADA BY 2027.
Make Hybrids & Electrical vehicles more affordable & get charging infrastructure in place
We make decisions everyday that affects every one we need to take responsibility for our actions moving forward together we can move mountains working together we need to establish a no carbon footprint future otherwise the next generations are not going to enjoy the world we know today
Get rid of your lawn = less energy used to now, less watering. Replace it with plants, like thyme or clover.  Plant more hardy perrenials that require little watering.  And most importantly, use your outdoor space to grow food. There are no downsides. Save money, eat better.
Charge devises by the sun
Offer enticive government incentives for developers and builders to implement Passive House philosophy and technology in community planning. As a society, use as little of resources as possible and leave as small of a footprint on the earth as possible. Do better than using homes as solar energy harnessers, design homes so they use less of this energy and feed more energy back to the grid!
"Passive house" accreditation is already a requirement of all rezoning projects now in vancouver and it's going to be great!
Have more vertical gardens on tall buildings (commercial, condos, etc).
.
It is important to teach children from a young age how to make as small a footprint as possible...it is their future they are learning to protect...start young enough and it will be natural to them to protect the environment.
We should turn off lights and any electronic when not in use. We should also use energy efficient light bulbs
In Ontario we're told to conserve and utilize renewable energy. The residents of Ontario did such a good job that our electricity rates we're INCREASED because the government had more than they needed and had to sell the excess power at a loss. We're still selling power at a loss, CEO's are making stupid silly over the top paycheques while so many people have to choose to pay the electricity bill or eat. 
Agreed
All home and cars should be fuelled by solar energy with the use of solar panels which would reduce emissions
Upstream and downstream emissions from solar are huge, there is huge toxic lakes of sludge from production and no way to recycle.
In some areas where big international companies have wells set up, surrounding communities are being forced to sink deeper wells for their own day to day use. Possibly exacerbated by climate change additionally. But allowing the water to be drawn up, bottled, then shipped elsewhere is a huge amount of energy being expended - and a lot of energy that surrounding communities then need to expend in order to ensure they themselves have water to live.
If this is happening, it is because there is a market for it. To disallow would potentially sink some companies. If this policy is really what the govt wants, it needs to be introduced slowly and step-wise to allow companies to leave the market carefully and not lose their shirts. Doesn't sound too fair. What would the carbon tax be on this water considering the energy to produce it.
we don't need yet another tax. Carbon tax and cap and trade will do nothing in Canada or Ontario for our environment. Canada already has a very low carbon footprint. The taxes collected for the above mentioned taxes will sit in the government coffers and spent on whatever pet projects the government at the time chooses. Industry, businesses and people are sick of getting taxed to the hilt just so the government can pat themselves on the back saying they actually are doing something. What they're doing is driving businesses and industries out of the province/country and with it jobsdisappear. So many people are living pay cheque to pay cheque because of over taxation and those are the lucky ones. Any new tax imposed upon businesses and industries will be passed onto the consumer. It is simply ridicules how much tax we are paying. 
What are you willing to give up?
Safeguarding our aquifers (ground water), as well as wetlands, streams, and lakes will be so important for the Health of our communities. We often take fresh water for granted. Implementing more water saving technologies including educating on water conservation, will be imperitive. Also restricting the exploitation or destruction of precious water sources will be the responsibility of us all- not just government (cough- nestle- cough). Working with landowners and the agricultural community to stress the importance of water protection across the landscape (saving swamps and wetlands, keeping streams covered) will be extremely important- and providing incentive programs will be key in accomplishing this. Implementing better stormwater systems including grey water and rain garden systems will be innovative and cost-saving for urban communities and will reduce toxins and flooding downstream along lakes and reduce stress on water treatment plants.
Farming creates way more greenhouse gas than anything else. But the government already knows this. The government has way too much to lose financially if they look at mass farming. Cattle farming is the worst culprit.
We should move to zero carbon and permanently pave over all arable land to prevent escape of rogue methane emissions from decomposition.
I'm sick and tired of having to eat 3 times a day too!
teach kids to play outside safely like we used to, read books, play sports and play board games. unplug.
Tax regular cars more such that they are more expensive that regular cars.. Same for appliances. New home builders will go for the cheaper and cleaner alternative. If others rebel and buy the expensive option then use tax money to further invest in clean energy.
For people who drive in rural areas, all of the BEV and PHEV vehicles don't provide enough "electric miles" to suffice as an exact equivalent. I work for a mining company that works with mining equipment OEMS and we utilize battery electric vehicles. Diversification is key. A more connected industry would enable us all to learn more from the leading players as I can only imagine the synergies between the leading manufacturers between mining and auto companies. I work for PROVIX, who manufactures safety systems for mobile equipment and process monitoring in multiple industries.
I think if we started to utilize electrical vehicles (provided we get rid of liberals , ie Kathleen Wynn and her absorbent idea of utility rates).  Thank you:)
Programs to help citizens to build their own power sources like from compost scraps, solar, wind, geothermal technology, growing our own food. Making sure every Canadian is well informed and has easy access (and affordable) to recycling facilities, energy efficient appliances, lights, etc.
i know our family would participate more if energy saving things were more affordable. - Cheaper or rebates on solar panels - cheaper or rebates on electric cars - cheaper or rebates on geo tech heating solutions we have looked into each of these things but they are beyond something we can afford. I also wish that we were allowed to have a couple chickens and small gardening support on individual homes.
All Canadian houses/buildings must install solar roofs, to generate the electrical power for ourselves and others, also a research money should be invested in same form of technology in auto industry to obtain abundance of oil dependence and hence the green house gases.  The government should subsidise the home and auto projects to encourage and motivate people towards bringing this Change.
The government could offer incentives to homeowners who use solar and geothermal systems at their homes.
No government subsidies, what the government gives to one person it must first steal from another.
The developmemt of urban rooftop greenhouses that can grow fruits and vegetables year round. They are closer to the market which decreases the carbon footprint. They also can help insulate buildings in winter and keep them cooler in the summer. There can be clean energy sources like wind, biomass,  solar and rising heat from floors below to keep warm in winter. There will be an increase in oxygen from plants. There will also be an opportunity for skill building for displaced workers. Consider also food security that will be of increasing concern. These will be building smarter sustainable cities that will be less vulnerable to climate change related disasters that will impact food supply.
I read about tidal power to push and suck wind in a column that had wind turbines in. Did this idea ever get created?
Ensure no fees are charged to homeowners with excess electricity generation who are able to sell it back to the grid. Consider financial incentives ie redeemable credits for services and products that improve efficiency. Make these credits semi-transferable to increase penetration of green updates to homes.
would teach kids a lot about energy while growing up and would cut emissions for homes and businesses
I'd like to see solar panels only on roof tops. Keep the fields free from panels until every Walmart, storage building and Cineplex is bursting with them. Not to mention residential rooftops that can accommodate them.
First of all we should encourage our people to reduce food wastage which will help us to reduce our resources and ultimately push us closer to our goal
The government can facilitate the creation of clean energy coops. The idea is to help Canadians invest and share the cost of building Solar Farms, Wind Farms, Geothermal utilities, wave or biomass generators that can sell energy into the interconnected grid but can also disengage and provide power independently during exceptional circumstances. The excess energy could be sold for a shared profit and coop members would have significantly lower heating costs. This could also help build the electric car quick charge stations grid across Canada much quicker if coops are encouraged to include in business model 
Offering community residential owners more affordable means of installing solar panels to produce their own energy. Presently, a residential home owner would. Red tonown their own home for 25+ years to break even on this type of initiative. Perhaps offering grants, significant discounts, etc
No more subsidies!
Rewards, credits or ways to gamefy energy conservation and savings would be an interesting way to engage in the younger generation
Not just the younger generation, gen-x and below would enjoy it!
I would love a tesla but it isnt a reality...for the vast majority of Canadians. Not counting the prohibitive price, there are no charging stations. Solar on your home? Sure...if you're wealthy...but its not a reality for the rest of us. Retrofit and upgrade houses? Only if the thing burns to the ground, god forbid. The suggestions and ideas required to bring Canada into the future are far out of the reach of the majority of Canadians. Lets stop subsidizing the fossil fuel industries and help the alternate energy sector develop the technology to the point where it is reachable by the common canadian. You can raise minimum wage, but those poor folks will still never afford the technology and upgrades required to make even a modest home efficient. Suppose I could afford a tesla. I live in Sault ste Marie, ON. The nearest major centers are beyond the range of the car. We need fast charge stations in between to make it a viable option. As it stands now I would STILL need a gas vehicle to be able to leave my city. These goals are admirable, but our leaders are ignoring the realities of our country.  Geothermal is awesome....provided you have the 40k required to install the system.
End Subsidies. 
Every time we double the consumption of solar, the price goes down 20% (Swanson's Law). https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Swanson%27s_law#/media/File:Swansons-law.png Alternative energy is moving forward, in time the majority of Canadians will find it affordable. "The cost of Chinese-made photovoltaic modules fell from $4.50 per watt in 2006 to $1 per watt in 2011". https://www.nrel.gov/news/press/2017/swiss-scientists-power-past-solar-efficiency-records.html Tesla 3 will only be $35K US https://www.tesla.com/en_CA/model3 
Forcing strata to allow solar, and offering low interest loans for owners to install it.
Plan to make solar cars and solar panels the norm:)
use solar panels to power our homes. Installation of panels on all new homes decreases the need for non renewable resources
Reducing Canada's consumption of meat would be an enormous step toward reducing carbon emissions. Producing nitrogen fertilizer, clearing forested land for pasture, methane production in the stomachs of cows, producing and applying pesticides and fresh water for irrigation of feed crops, heating barns in the winter... The list of how meat releases carbon into the air goes on and on. And ultimately, there are healthier food sources than the factory farmed meat we consume today. So reducing its consumption would kill two birds with one stone and make a greener, healthier, more sustainable Canada. I think a carrot and stick approach could be applied here: regulations applied to make farming less carbon intensive, perhaps through the universal adoption of some of the organic standards; and an ad campaign (with subsidy incentives?) to encourage the replacement of meat on Canadians' plates with more vegetables and meat alternatives like soy and legumes.
I have 16 solar panels on my house. But the power generated from them is sent to the local power company and then I have to buy it back from them. I believe that I should be able to use the power I make, and sell the extra to the local company. This would be a bigger incentive to people to have the construction done to their roof to accomadate the panels.
We need to make the choice of environmentally friendly options more affordable. We need to make the choice of hybrid/electric vehicles cheaper. We need to make the use of public transit more affordable. We need to make locally sourced organic foods more affordable than processed foods. We need to make the choice accessible and affordable for everyone.
Our schools and their surrounding lands need to be revisioned as multipurpose community hubs. A place whose workshop, library, gym, pool and tech room are available year-round (during school off-hours) to the surrounding neighbourhood. A place that could, for instance, incorporate a walk-in clinic or public health office, a cafe, or a seniors residence to serve the surrounding community. Putting a 'heart' into a neighbourhood combats people's feelings of isolation and alienation and reduces the need for people to drive out of their neighbourhoods. Urban and suburban densification alone will not reduce driving and CO2 emissions. We need an alternative vision to the previous plan, especially the suburban one, of the shopping mall serving as the heart of a community.
Consume the food you purchase without allowing it to expire and become trash. Eat not what you "feel like" having, instead consume perishables first to prevent trashing food and wasting money. Reducing food waste will ultimately benefit the environment and help individuals economize.
Design a small turbine that turns when it's raining and/or windy to generate power. By combining that with solar panels, one can generate power whether it's sunny, windy or raining. Encourage communities to plant more fruit trees in public spaces. Promote the development of using algea as a fuel source. Encourage the use of more hemp for paper products rather than trees. Design more compostable products that are currently made from plastic.
I think the idea of making affordable solar and hydro energy would be great. Our home is sq feet and finding affordable ways to manage and sustain our home is always on our list. We have a river/creek that runs through the front of our property and have approached the city and BC hydro about building a waterwheel in it to help create power for our home. So Water and solar energy will be around for a very long time, why not use them to our advantage...with out abusing it of course
We need to create a future for our kids and our kids kids, let's stop poluting and start thinking and creating a cleaner future, solar panels on all homes and business and vehicles.. everything solar powered. Make it affordable though. Our kids are the future... Let's hall make it a bright one!
Improve on technological advancement, make solar power a more prevalent thing in Canada. When we use hot or warm warm water at home, rather than using hot water tank, try to use water heated by natural energy like the sun (unfortunately, I feel like the solar energy is not as common in Canada yet comparing to a few less developed countries that I have seen/heard/been to). Drive less and walk more. It not only provides us with a healthier lifestyle, but also a better future for our next generations.
You can't solar and wind everything. You require a energy source that you can't control and make to produce when these forms aren't. They also don't produce near enough energy for the size to be viably mounted on top of vehicles 
in order for Canadian households to embrace a greener lifestyle, programs to assist families and households go greener need to be made more affordable.  For example, the program to fit solar panels on household roofs requires a large payment that many wont qualify for the government payout due to current debt, and the household wont see any actual energy savings for over 10 years. Making these programs more affordable would go a long way to encouraging more households to switch to renewable energy.
when reducing/phasing out the oil sector, offering training and similar paying jobs to those who work in the oil sands in clean energy would be very important.
My idea to raise on energy efficiency is to start a program in schools that focuses on the amount of waste an individual creates such as in packaging of goods and food. By purchasing food from markets and goods with biodegradable packaging people can help reduce the amount of waste that ends up in landfills. Keeping a jar that holds all the waste that you accumulated that can not be composted it serves as a reminder of how much waste we produce from packaging and our everyday consumption of goods. It allows people to think about clean tech and renewable energy sources.
As canadians we have a very fortunate position to not only help ourselves , but to also. greatly help others in the world who do not have the same resources available to them ,in addition to the renewable , variable sources such as wind and solar which will come down in REAL costs in the years to come, we also have huge reserves of oil,apparently 3rd greatest in the world, as well as untold reserves of natural gas which is one of the most cost effective source of energy for production of electricity and heat . we need to continue to develop our abundant hydro-electric resources , but they are limited to the relativly few, remote locations which are usually a long way from the major consumption areas.. our access to these resources has been limited by the short sighted political views of a small minority of people with their own agenda.. we need to develop a NATIONAL strategy to allow for pipeline access to east as well as west coast to utilize canadian resources for ALL canadians , it is rediculous that canada imports 300.000 BBLs of oil a day while letting an pipeline sit empty that can be used to supply western oil to eastern canada... while we can reduce our own impact we can do a lot to help many Asian countries which are presently building coal fired electric plants which have more effect on global GHG then we can reduce here in Canada.. we need yo use our export abilities to provide a reliable source of revenue which can provide for all our many needs of health care , education, infrastructure, etc; etc; for many ,many generations to come while reducing polution world wide,, our oilsand emmissions are less then many fields in california, as well as many other places in the world but emotion seems to have taken precedence over fact, which is harmful to all Canadians ..Canadian energy industry has the most thorough ,reliable ,safety standards in the world which are fderally enforced.. We must remember that Canada is very sparsley populated cold northern country and we have many communities that are not gaining the perks that are cosidered universal in the populated areas, but resources must be found somehow to equalize benifits for all..
Newly built homes should have an incentive to use geothermal energy. The incentives need to be significant in order to encourage the use of this resource.
Bring green industry to Alberta. Replace oil jobs with clean energy jobs. Make them green.
I'll just click my heels together and get right on that. How about we continue responsible development of the world's third largest oil reserves and make a pile of money for everyone! Yes! workers, companies, governments - everybody wins!
I started my power career in generation at one of the largest hydro plants in the world, Churchill Falls, NL. Newfoundland and Labrador generates enough excess power to provide the requirements for several provinces. In particular the biggest polluting province, Saskatchewan, should be forced to give up burning all the dirty coal that it uses and import excess clean energy from it's national neighbors. Canada has enough hydro resources to power the whole country and still export to it's international neighbor. We already have the capacity, we just need to build the transmission infrastructure and create national regulations to enforce it. Don't allow some provinces to destroy our country just so they can save a little money.
Waste generation is a global challenge, including in Canada, and rising with population growth, urbanization, and consumption. Societies generate multiple waste streams  from MSW, waste biomass, hazardous, medical, construction, demolition, tires, food, e-waste, etc., that typically end-up in landfills with or without recycling. In some cases, waste streams (both hazardous and non-hazardous) is exported to other countries for treatment or simply landfilling. As a holistic 'circular-economy' approach, in-line with the waste hierarchy and 'zero' waste strategies, an integrated waste-to-energy (WTE) facility is one such solution. This could include a front-end material recycling facility (MRF), enabling separation of recyclable materials, followed by treatment of 'post-recycled' waste and create renewable energy. Alternatively, a WTE facility can be built alongside an existing MRF, share resources and avoid long-range transportation. However, the challenge to overcome is the cost. WTE facilities are dependent on waste tipping fees, long-term waste supply agreements, and power purchase agreements (PPAs) for sustainability and revenue generation. Currently, most jurisdictions already spend substantial budgets for waste and landfill management. This excludes the costs for CO2/MH4 emissions reduction and medical costs due to human health issues. If governments at both the federal and municipal levels could offset such costs (similar to other infrastructure funding), and considering mitigation of the above issues a priority, then the benefits overweigh costs. Simultaneously, long-term incentive models such as renewable energy certificates (REC) for energy generation and emissions reduction could be applied. This would enable recycling and reduction of waste, emissions reduction while providing a safe and healthy environment for all Canadians. This could be a win-win solution for generations to come. Thank you for this opportunity.
increase government subsidies for clean energy options; both corporately and privately. Electric vehicles, solar power, etc.
Are you not taxed to death already? You want your taxes to increase to SUBSIDIZE uneconomic "clean energy options" Give your head a shake!
To help increase the number of houses switching to clean energy such as solar panels provide an incentive and also education on how it can help save money as well as the environment. The same could go for electric cars.
Thank you for your submission! For a more in depth look at renewables and Canada's future, please have a look at this paper.
People in Canada drive too much. We need to make it easier for people to give up their vehicles. We should invest in public transit by massively increasing service, and paying people to use it. People could voluntarily put a tracker in their cars, and then get paid for driving less or not at all. Or people could get paid by number of days per month that they take transit.
Make efficient use of surface area - Canada is a big country with big cities and lots of unused potential space. While remembering to stay structurally sound, we can plant on roofs. Gardens, for example. Grow some of your own produce - that stuff's guaranteed organic if that's your thing. This would also let residents in buildings have a space like a community garden that is convenient to get to and therefore more likely to add more plants. Our air would be cleaner, and morale would improve having them in sight in a dense urban setting. This will take a while to implement, but is certainly possible with the eventual rebuilding of many old residences (because they're not energy efficient and everything in them will give you cancer, right? ;) We can hire contractors and other skilled workers to retrofit some buildings. We can have them supervised by local farmers. It would add to biodiversity and help the bees There are obviously many kinks though - weight, for instance, meaning we need to ensure more well supported roofs, and a means for rain drainage. Also winters are cold. Plants don't like cold. But engineers can get on that. It would be costly, though to implement, with no real decrease in energy expenditure. Maybe bioenergy??? Also bugs. There are going to be bugs on your roof so screen your windows, everyone.  
Solar panel on top of all our public schools
Why not consider research on containers that can be eaten or composted?
There are grocery stores in the Netherlands, England and the US. I think that there might be some in Vancouver or Toronto (not sure). That offer Zero waste grocery shopping. People have to bring their own containers and bags. They are charged by weight, etc... the paper receipts are not the dangerous stuff that is provided at regular stores, etc...  I keep hoping that an entrepreneur near me would open one.  Perhaps, there should be a green entrepreneur grant...where unemployed people get x amount of dollars to work with Economic Development officers or regional business centers to launch green businesses. the Ec.Dev. people can help with business plan writing, legal registrations, etc... and other necessary small business skills.
Investment on research of better energy sources. More efficient solar options, better battery and storage facilities, safe nuclear energy, more efficient chargers for electric cars, better electric engines, electric airplanes and boats.
Thank you for your submission! I believe this paper would be a great read according to your idea!
Starting in primary school teaching about sourcing protein from non- animal sources. Taste testing different foods made with alternatives such as tofu, pulses, etc. Reducing animal protein consumption makes for less greenhouse gases, more economical use of land, and a kinder world.
Sorry - I do not disagree but I can't help reading that and thinking...bacon makes everything taste better.  There are a couple of issues: One is that meat eaters will see that as pushing a particular political agenda and engagement becomes difficult and it will turn into a political football. I would think that Governments can create policy to ensure stricter and more humane controls are in place on how animals are reared and prepared for market. I think it would take successive steps to move towards a generally accepted policy of animal consumption reduction legislation.  Secondly, education is a provincial responsibility and the Federal government can provide suggestions and include general guidelines about certain topics. But the actual development of curriculum is not within the sphere of control for the Feds and I can see several provinces having a fit if their Section 92 powers under the constitution is messed with.
I do spinclass once in a while... and I always think, why isnt there a way to collect energy from the bikes in the studio... like maybe it can help power the studios themselves.
I feel the same way! We should be harvesting energy from the entire cardio section of a gym
Use mechanical means to store surplus energy created. Effectively replace batteries, which in and of themselves, are convenient but nasty. Store the energy as potential energy using weigh, torsion, water displacement. Needs some debate, brainstorming and research.
Can surplus energy be used to freeze water in the north? Or conventionally if freezing water means extracting energy from water, can it be a source of energy?
Any time you change states of energy you have huge losses, electrical, hydraulic, or otherwise! 
Build more windmills
we have already made changes. We are a one car family. We use transit where possible, use energy efficient bulbs, walk to shops, switch to vegan, use energy saving thermostats. As new ways to save on energy and the environment come along, we do what we can to adopt them. I would like to see our country sponsor renewable energy industries and look to what Germany has done to make renewables a major part of their energy foot print.
The government should promote and fund that every household have solar panels to supply energy to their homes. Not just supplement or provide small grants for purchasing solar panels, but to actually provide 100% funding. Why are we paying so much for our hydro? This absolutely does not make sense. There is so much money being wasted. We have so many intelligent people in our country why are we tapping those resources to get us out of this mess. You have the wrong people making decisions on behalf of all of us.     
Cost out price for negative aspects of using energy and give incentives for people using clean energy. Granted it's a balance between individual standard of living and the well being of the society. If we were like India where half of the population do not have access to electricity and have to rely on coal, it may not be realistic or more cost phohibitive. But perhaps at the very least we can try to make the individuals decide for themselves how much energy is worth to them and more consciously take the true cost into consideration.
I believe all new construction should have a minimum requirement to generate its own power for renewable sources be it wind, solar or other. Builders of communities should also have a requirement to include a power generating component as part of the community plan much like parks or schools.  In Canada solar is may not be the ideal generating method but small noise and bird friendly wind combined with solar could likely make a significant impact on the overall power grid if installed in signicant numbers.
Thank youfor your submission. I believe you would like this paper.The paper discusses how Canada could tackle climate change by changing to renewable energy.
Reestablish the energy savings program. I was an energy advisor and saw lots of people gain knowledge in energy savings
If we want more people to get around in a sustainable way, let's make reliable and efficient public transit and safe cycling infrastructure a priority in our major cities.
Funding for schools to be retrofitted with clean energy options
Less government spending on wasteful green initiatives.
Use more solar-powered items
Agreed, and let's start with installing solar panels on roofs. I think the key here is to make it a simple process for a homeowner to install panels on their property. Most people don't know where to start. Gov't could get involved buy providing homeowners with a vetted list of preferred vendors who can do the work. Gov't could also help by discounting the upfront cost of getting the solar power technology installed on the property. I've never checked but it's probably an expense project.
People need to stop and think seriously about what you are proposing! As of today there is not enough renewable energy produced in the whole world to power a major American city! You cannot manufacture cars, homes, office towers, clothes, medications, appliances, televisions, books, or greenhouses without fossil fuel. We have a bike path on the street past our home. The lines have been painted and repainted four times in the past year, with paint that comes from fossil fuel, by two men who arrive in a truck manufactured using fossil fuel and powered by fossil fuel. The men are clad from head to toe, including safety glasses produced from fossil fuel. The debate about fossil fuel is the only thing being powered by foreign interests with money from; you guessed it! Fossil Fuel! I would invite ideas about where to plug in the jumbo aircraft? In the meantime, the wind is causing a headache, killing the birds and the bats, and I am searching for a fossil fuel medication to alleviate.
Have individual homes generate energy for personal use.
Funding to support the installation of home solar or wind power, systems to integrate with grid power, and policies to allow extra power to be sold back to the grid.
What the government gives to one person it must first steal it from another, why not just less government waste and spending.
More environmental education in schools as well as initiatives to implement energy saving and environmentally-friendly strategies for students both at school and at home. It is important that we find ways forthe knowledge that they gather through education to be applied to their lives outside of school.
Great idea - the physical school can teach students too
They already teach environmentalism in schools. They need to actually teach fact based education including the value of hydrocarbons, the side effects of wind and solar and why Canada should be energy self sufficient. This would mostly fall under economic, which most k-12 teachers are not equipped to teach as they don't learn about it in university any longer as part of their Education Studies.
There are many ways to provide cleaner environment: From Government side: 1. Try to reduce registration of new cars and charge road tax 2 times if anyone wants to buy. This will make everyone think about "is car or private vehicle" real necessity? 2. Invest on improving public transport access everywhere in the country. There shouldn't be a place left in Canada which do not have public transport connectivity. 3. Bring in policy to monitor and run rental cars/ vehicles which will allow citizens to utilise when it is in dire need. 4. Push organisations/ offices to arrange a common transport or partner with public transport wing for their employee commute. 5. Encourage organisations to reward the employees who come by cycles, walk etc., 6. Device a method to monitor and deduce energy saving target for big companies or commercial buildings. 7. Sports and physical activities to be made must for kids in schools and universities. 8. Regular people representative talks on media to increase awareness of being active and benefits of contribution to community development.
We are an energy rich nation that is also an absorber of carbonAKA co2 which is plant food. 
Provide incentives or grants to strata owners for making buildings energy efficient and powered by alt energy (not just single family homes).
What we need are experts that can help owners of multi-family dwellings learn what upgrades can achieve net-zero results. There is the Rocky Mountain Institute in Colorado that works with large companies to show them how to upgrade their plumbing, HVAC, windows, etc... to achieve significant costs savings and energy independence.  This is the type of skill building that Canada should be concentrating on so we can build up capacity.
I am concerned that we are importing oil into Canada when we have plenty of oil in Canada. Think of all the money going out each day to support foreign countries when it could be staying in Canada.
For those that worry about oil tankers leaving Canada, think of how many are entering Canada each day bringing foreign oil.
Lets create School based carpool groups. We will be eliminating so many cars from idling in the parking lot or waiting to pull up and drop off. We will be increasing safety on the roads near schools by having less traffic and helping with working parents busy schedules. School parking lots are small because schools were created neighbourhood based-planning kids to walk. Lets be honest-how many kids are now too far to walk or maybe parents just dont feel comfortable? Carpool groups help eliminate the worry, knowing our kids are getting to school safe. This idea in win win on so many levels!
There is very few car dealerships in Canada that offer EV. It would be nice if the government provides dealers with incentives to encourage Canadians to swap their current gas vehicles for new clean energy vehicles. So not only would there be a rebate for people purchasing but those that are currentlymaking their payments for x amount of time can trade in their car and not have to roll in their old loan or pay off the old loan. It may speed up the rate of EV purchases and encourage dealers to start keeping them in stock.
This is a bad idea. Using my hard earned money (taxes) to pay someone to use technology that is not economically viable is a waste of MY money. Why are governments giving $10-15k away when you buy an electric car? Because they are $10-15k more expensive than an equivalent gasoline powered car! The are currently uneconomic! Yes eventually they will be economic but I DO NOT want to foot the bill to make up the difference in the meantime!
Provide better public transportation discounts for frequent travellers
Make electronic cars more affordable with more dealers selling electronic cars to create jobs. Ha e solar system in the houses affordable and providing more info on solar system-educating people.
i would like I see gas powered cars gone. the govermnts need to set a date for them to be gone so manufacturers put more effort into selling alternatives . and I believe diesel using grown fuel is an alternative to add for those needing longer distances or for larger vehicles like buses haulage trucks.

I'm assuming you are riding the electric bus and walking everywhere you go. All forms of fossil fuels purged from your life? Do you have any clue how much of your life depends on fossil fuels????
Do you live in a large city? If not electric cars will not be an efficient way of transportation. Then there is the cost and environmental issues with battery disposal. You will see many of the countries who are jumping on board with Electric only cars reversing that trend. Global consumption of Oil is growing year over year and not expected to peak in the near future.
Provide incentives for home owners to install solar panels on their rooves, and local electrical utilities need to find a way to readily accept and credit surplus generation from home-owners.

Creation of more bike lanes and encourage the use of small electric vehicles such as e-bikes or e-trikes where the carbon footprint is not only lower at the operating side, but also on the production side. As energy storage technology improves, the charge time required for such products will decrease. The research of graphene based capacitor, in theory, will allow full charging by simply taping a charging source. A small 500 watt hour battery on a typical ebike will charge in seconds. There are research sources that have compared co2 emissions of small, efficient cars to a cyclist riding a non-electric road bicycle and found that, taking into account the co2 generation of the processes of cultivating, harvesting, and transportation, it is actually more efficient to drive a small car. 

There is also reseach that shows cycling at moderate pace is healthy but cycling too much, be it at too high of an intensity or too long a duration, can be undesirable health wise. Electric bikes have the potential to resolve these issues. Canada should implement regulations that make travel by ebike, not only more affordable, but more safe and viable. Rather than implementing more costly bicycle lanes, it may be faster and more cost efficient to allow ebikes to be more compatable with our current roads. The state of California currently has a speed limit of 45 km/h and a power limit of 750 watts compared to the current limit of 32 km/h and 500 watts respectively in Canada. With a speed limit of 32km/h, a cyclist needs to generate 18km/h of speed in the face of wind resistance in order to keep up with traffic or have traffic constantly pass by. The latter represents one of the major hazards of cycling where not all drivers on the road are aware of the saftey regulations and do not give the cyclist enough room when passing and is one of the major reasons people refrain from using ebikes as an alternative form of transportation. Having a speed limit of 45 will allow cyclists to better keep up with traffic without over exerting the body and travel at a lower level of risk.
  
The basic idea about Concentrated Solar Power plants (CSP) is to harvest heat from the sun by redirecting its rays toward a collector where it's going to be transformed into an electricity supply and/or process heat. CSP offers a lot of advantages, like the capacity to store energy over a long period of time or allow to rectify electric ripples coming from other energy sources.
My idea is to add solar panel on roofs to power our own homes.
The cost of building, maintaining, decommissioning, and dealing with the waste of nuclear power plants should all be included in comparing the cost with renewable energy options, with a large factor included for the additional risks posed by the supply chain elements of highly dangerous fuel elements.

Currently, themain stumbling block for the average person buying an electric car is the price. Perhaps our government could either subsidize the cost of purchase an Electric Vehicle, or put laws in place that limit the amount a dealership is allowed to charge. If it was actually less expensive for the consumer to purchase the EV version of a particular vehicle, when compared to the fuel version, EV purchases would naturally skyrocket, while fuel driven vehicles would naturally plummet.
Where does the government get the money to subsidize?  

As a Torontonian (GTA'er, to be specific), I have seen our traffic go from bad, to terrible, to intolerable. It is impacting the health and well-being of working citizens--and all levels of transportation, from individual vehicle, to public transit, and even to "alternative" options like bicycling. Bicycling is a sporadic choice for most except hard-core riders due to the general need to flow with traffic as bike lanes and dedicated systems are in some areas but not others. As a human geography major in the 1990s, there was a sense that non-centralized and alternative means of work access were on the uptake. Virtual offices made sense: they were seen as a way to reduce overhead costs to large corporations, in particular. Technology made these home or satellite (work close to home) options viable. Unfortunately, we are now grid-locked again, and worse than ever, as single individuals in cars, and GO trains, subways, and crammed buses ship the masses to 9-5 jobs of all varieties.

 There has to be a better way! What if businesses had incentives (tax based, or direct) for facilitating employees to work from home, or near home to alleviate pressure on our transportation systems? Anyone whose job could be done virtually vs in person. Perhaps a registry of businesses willing to incorporate this could also be implemented. Incentives could be percentage based, so a workplace that reduces on-site jobs and converts to from or near-home positions by 10% would see one level of incentive, a business at 15% would see a higher level, and so forth. How to justify the cost of these incentives? The idea would directly alleviate use of roads and public services. This reduced usage would make it eventually possible to save on road and public transportation growth/development costs (that can run into the millions or more). Meanwhile, employees not having to travel to and from a workplace for what can be as much as 6+ round-trip hours a day will be more productive, more likely to have additional available time, and be statistically healthier physically and mentally.

Make sure you appeal to the masses and educate the youth of today
I am delighted to learn about the continued progress the Canadian government is making to create a cleaner & greener Canada for us all by implementing conscientious & positively future-impacting pOlivier. Change is never easy and often slow to take, but any positive change is sure to make a difference. Since the Gov of Canada has the ability to impact decisions that impact out environment, our energy sources, and our schools... why not overlap them all? I've been learning about canada's new clean-energy sources, through their creative PSAs, Apps like Carrot, and providing info online, and while I enjoy it, I think most people indifferent about it. So, If the goal is to educate and appeal to the youth today, why not implement the info into classrooms? Even a fun, interactive lesson (or educational daytrip) could not only inspire individual reflection &formation of new healthy habits, but possibly aspire a few towards a career in the energy sector.
Lets together pledge to stop investing in fossil fuels and instead direct that money towards generating more jobs around renewable energies and building up Canada's renewable energy industry - renewables are more than the future, they are the only viable alternative.
Put a plan in place to eliminate fossil fuel card in cities by 2020. Complete plan by 2025. Use incentive to get that done.
Marina- If you take all the fossil fuels out of your life you will likely be dead within a couple weeks. Fossil fuels make the world go around. We cannot support 7 B people without them. They are cheap and plentiful. Wind and solar are NOT the answer to any problem unless your are trying to syphon money from tax paying citizens to corporations that can only survive with government handouts.
Developping batteries and funding research in that domain will help store the energy we know how to harvest. As a result, homes and infrastructure will be independent of a power grid. In addition, speed up the paradigm shift towards energy scavenging. We also need forever more engineers to work together to provide solutions!
i live in a townhouse complex. 4 homes per block. 50-70% of the residents are part time. We could easily use solar panels across the entire community (40 homes) with battery storage and share solar energy. On my block 3 homes out of 4 are vacant weekend homes only. Plenty of avail energy off the grid could be possible.  We need to create a country that is self sufficient , independent and highly efficient where we dont need outside dependencies.  Love With nature and off grids to help the planet and the citizens of Canada. Provide incentives for condos and townhomes to install solar.  Follow elan musk (Tesla). He has genius concepts that are doable.  We are too far behind. The biggest issue is we waste far too much energy.  Make it law to have timers in hallways if all skyscrapers/ condos.  Wasteful 24/7 lights in thousands of buildings while everyone is asleep !??! Timers - use them !!!!  We have to change our attitudes to stop wasting and taking advantage of our resources and planet.  If I paid the bills Id have we the entire system rearranged and thats what people are missing. When you dont pay or are affected nothing changes and we just throw out money out the window.  Plenty of solar technology to build a global grid !!
Hydro electric power
Buy Canadian, use our oil from Alberta in our refineries in the east and stop buying oil from offshore. Electric cars maybe part of our long term mix but they not only need to address the long distance of our trips but must keep us warm in the cold months. Electrical storage is a missing link. Support our economy by using our natural resources in our own country
I think the idea of using what we have and nothing more is a good way to understand our usage.
My idea would be to use Canadian tax dollars to stimulate the capture pf waste gas in other countries, such as Nigeria. Odd and counter-intuitive as this may seem, this is an easy, much less expensive way to remove vast quantities of flared and vented gas out of earth's atmosphere in one fell swoop. There are 78" flare stacks in operation which burn more gas than some Canadian Explorers and Producers make for a living. We would still bring in emissions-mitigating regulations as are currently being formed for new-builds in Canada, but Canadians could take credit for reducedglobal GHG emissions on a huge scale. And it's a money maker? We can even make money doing this, as the captured and processed gas has commercial value. By entering into business partnerships with in-country polluters/producers and strong commercial support from EDC and the Canadian Trade Commissioners, we can make an bigdifference. My company works with this type of equipment for clients who buy Canadian extraction plantsbecause the economics look good to them, even without the GHG calculations. Why not have Canada subsidize the equipment and take credit for the mitigation effect and take credit for our emissions reduction? Flare improvement has a similar effect. We have Canadian flameless flaring equipment already proving we can make a difference in Kuwait, Nigeria and elsewhere. As we're now committed to importing energy from a lot of these countries in increasing volumes (due to Energy East cancellation) for environmental reasons, we should be just as committed to reducing the carbon footprint of these imported hydrocarbons. How it works: Captured gas could be used to generate more reliable power or supply cleaner-burning energy to locals. Liquids extracted can be sold on international markets for profit. (Nigeria flares 3 Trillion Cubic Feet of gas per day! Just taking 1/3 of that out of the atmosphere would be the equivalent to building 14,000 windmills a year or removing 14 coal-fired plants a year! (sourcehttps://www.epa.gov/energy/greenhouse-gas-equivalencies-calculator) And,like windmills, this power would be available for revenue, and unlike windmills it would be available 24/7 to any buyers out there. What do you think Canada? It's cooler than exporting CanDu reactors, has a positive effect on the globe, creates jobs in Canada and puts an enormous dent in Canada's net emissions balance.
New homes should have "roughed in" hardware and wiring so if and when the homeowner makes the decision to add solar it would be turn key.
Harness all the energy produced in fitness centers doing activities such as cycling and running and paddling. Televisions can be powered by peddle bikes, likely many other things could also be powered similarly. With hundreds of thousands of fitness centres across the country, not to mention individual home machines, there is a huge source of "renewable energy" if it could be hooked up to the grid.  
phasize more on this issues in early education. Make it a habit.
The fuel burned while everyone is trapped in commuter gridlock Monday to Friday in Ottawa is obscene. Turn some of the government buildings downtown in to apartment buildings and give priority to tenants who work within walking distance. The government bodies that were moved out of those buildings can be established farther west (ex. Kanata or Barrhaven) where many of the commuters trying to get downtown are actually coming from. Boom! Reduced carbon emissions!
Offer monetary incentive to company to pass down to employees to promote carpooling, bus/train transportations and keep their car at home.
Sure if it's possible. It doesn't work for many,people.
Use bus systems in the city often
It's a good idea, but not possible for all people. How much money and emissions and money is being wasted Our so called Asylum Seekers.
Human caused climate change is a FRAUD, the purpose is to destroy industrial economies by eliminating abundant affordable energy. There is NO greenhouse effect. Please read: The Deliberate Corruption of Cimate Science  by Tim Ball, PhD. - Link to Amazon Canadahttps://www.amazon.ca/dp/0988877740/ref=cm_sw_r_tw_awdo_x_pFwIybPG3NMR5 Human Caused Global Warming - The Biggest Deception in History - by Tim Ball, PhD. (Link to Apple store, an electronic version of the easier reading edition of Dr. Ball's work)https://itun.es/ca/x159eb.l Human Caused Global Warming - The Biggest Deception in History - Link to Amazon Canada - for the paperback edition - there is also a kindle edition. https://www.amazon.ca/gp/aw/d/1773021303/ref=tmm_pap_title_0?ie=UTF8&qid=1504449876&sr=8-1 Dr. Ball's website: www.drtimball.com
Al Gore, Gerald Butts and Trudeau should be jailed
UN's global socialist agenda and vying to be the one world government has been unmasked...... 
no need for dratics changes. Just a little conservation/energy savings atbatime will work wonder.
Very very little time should spent on Solar or Wind Power.
It would be nice to see solar panels be manditory on all new builds.
Too Expensive and will break Canada. Look at Eastern Canada, what a Scam.
 make the electric cars more affordable to general public.
Electric cars are always going to be expensive and should not be subsidized but Governments. What little difference Canada makes in world C02 emissions will do next to nothing for So Called Climate Change!
by using solar power and energy in our homes and offices we can greatly lower costs and reduce our carbon footprint
It's a Tax Scam and waste of time with Canada's 1.6% Global Emissions.
We are not going to change a thing other than Saudi Arabia Rich
More incentives for switching to a greener lifestyle to make the transition easier and less costly
If this is such a grand idea, it wouldn't need so much incentives. Ontario is a prime example of why we don't want to go down this road at this time.
If homes can get off the grid and produce their own solar energy or geothermal energy, this will help cut costs, aid in the cost of living and help lower our carbon footprint.
Oil and gas can be much more efficient, and none of the proposed replacements are practical yet. O & G will be the best alternative for at least 50 years, and can be very beneficial to Canada.
Oil and gas will be here for a long time. Renewable options will never fill the void. Need more piplines to get Alberta oil out of province. If you think renewables will take over your living in a dream world. Will never happen.
Canada has the most stringent environmental practices in the world. We came more for the environment and do more to protect it than say, Venezuela, Saudi Arabia, Iran, Iraq etc. The demand for oil and gas continues to grow. It makes no sense therefore, to buy oil from thes above mentioned nations that have little regard for the environment. Not to mention shipping it half way across the planet by super tanker. The decision to cancel the energy east pipeline was largely due to the Trudeau governments decision to consider upstream greenhouse gas emissions from western oil. Many cheer this decision as a step forward for the environment. These same people who cheer this decision will continue to live in doors however. They will likely continue to drive cars. Eat in restaurants. Go to the library. Take vacations. Go to the grocery store. Purchase groceries. Etc. All of these activities and myriad others depend on a cheap dependable source of oil and gas. To summarize, the demand for oil and gas continues. Consider then the upstream greenhouse gas emissions of oil production in Saudi Arabia to fill that demand unabated. Consider also, the ongoing greenhouse gas emissions of shipping that oil to Canada by super tanker. Several per week. With no end in sight. If these emissions were weighed against shipping oil to eastern Canada by pipeline from western Canada, I do believe it would prove vastly more economical, and produce far less emissions than super tanker. And note again, the end result is the same. Oil will be refined and shipped from eastern refiners to various locations for further distribution within Canada via pipeline. And yes Denny Codere, even by pipelines within Quebec. The demand remains the same. It will only be the source of the oil that will be decided.
This is such a no-brainer that I can hardly believe we have to discuss this. It has been studied to death. The country needs the money and while Canada dithers away opportunity after opportunity, the rest of the world profits.
Our federal government has lost sight of one of Canada's revenue generators. I had high hopes for our country but without Oil/gas we are doomed to becoming much less than we could be. Its embarrassing that we import liquid resources from countries such as Saudi, Ven. etc....Support Canada by supporting its resource sector with meaningful projects...allow for tide water access and stop with the pandering to small political groups with little sense of finance. Our federal government has been a massive disappointment!
Hydrogen can be manufactured using current energy sources, and instead of burning it, we can pass it through a proton exchange membrane to produce the output of energy and water (Hydrogen and Oxygen combined). Vehicles equipped with a HFC energy storage can travel slightly further than from the energy density fossil fuels, for a slightly greater cost. If government could subsidize this temporarily, as they had wind and solar, it could accelerate adoption rates. Heres a good, recent release: https://energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2017/06/f34/fcto-h2-fc-overview-dla-worldwide-energy-conf-2017-satyapal.pdf
The liberal government display integrity for the first time in 2 years and resign and call an election. After you killed energy east & all the rest, you are the biggest obstacle to the success of Canada. Jim Carr propaganda speech today was ridiculous. It proved you are so out of touch as to be clueless. Respect this country enough to do the right thing. RESIGN
resign step down get out of the way of our fossil fuel industry it is the cleanest in the world we are a carbon sink and this is complete madness spend //money were wasting like wyynn in ontario on even better tech in clean coal etc you are driving canada broke while the world is building more coal fired plants this is very very stupid who dreamed this up.
tbh abolishing corporate materialism and the waste thst goes along with it would be awesome
Establish goals to reduce fossil fuel consumption
Providing financial incentives or other forms of compensation to encourage energy efficiency may be effective. Exhibiting positive behaviour by showing policy makers and public figures doing things like purchasing electric vehicles or installing solar panels as a form of energy in the their homes may also work well.
This is an energy-saving tip that is hardly ever talked about and is quite simple. Don't have kids! This saves the world the immense amount of resources your child would use up and also the resources of their children and so forth. This method is actually more effective than reducing electricity, water and fossil fuel consumption, recycling, or eating less meat. Don't have kids and the planet will thank you for it!
With all the forest fire that we face each year in Canada, I beleive it is reasonable to offer tax credit for planting trees.
Having efficient and reliable transit system in the city. Also promoting the use of bikes and making riding bikes the norm.
We NEED to make cycling, running, walking, skating, and skiing safer modes of transportation in Canada, by focusing on building all roads with barrier shielded, or raised multi-lane paths so that self-propelled travelers are protected from injury from motor traffic. Motivating incentives should be offered for single and zero car households, and subsidies should be offered to assist with the high cost of purchasing bicycles and other equipment that is of a high enough quality to safely and reliably travel. Funding for road upgrades should focus on zero emission travel within communities, possibly moving towards communities built around city cores, with zero cars allowed within the city, only bike and pedestrian lanes, and skytrains for quick commuting.
Implement a system where the government subsidizes the cost of fuel for students who car pool. Possibly integrate an application program. If you car pool, the government will assist the cost of gas, therefore reducing the number of vehicles on the road.
Create more hydro electric dams and even look into wind farms, in general just cleaner, cheaper power for us people to buy. Not to mention, this will create thousands of jobs, while keeping our climate cleaner and healthier in the long run.
retrain workers with these funds to secure an economically viable transition to the green energy sector.
What subsidies? The industry pays some of the highest taxes in the world. It has been such a cash cow that governments are loathe to do without it. In Alberta for example, the NDP were elected with a view of restricting production and exports and were essentially against all export pipeline projects but now that they have control of the books there isn't an export pipeline they don't support. The green sector, however, is already heavily subsidized with guaranteed electricity purchases at high rates. See Ontario as an example. Higher rates have been passed to consumers but the government is eating the majority of the increased costs by increasing the debt. Move along folks. Nothing to see here.
Canada could create jobs, keep energy affordable by requiring phone companies to switch their batteries to betavoltic nuclear batteries. The longevity of the betavoltic nuclear battery will conserve energy and keep it affordable, seeing that the battery will enable a phone to live out its life without having to be charged. The switch to betavoltic nuclear batteries will create new jobs and require an influx of workers to manufacture the new phones. The switch to this battery will decrease the usage of energy by a considerable amount; the reduction in electricity usage that charging a phone would have required will make energy more affordable for Canadians.
Change most, to all of the cars that are a part of a taxi service to electric cars.
I think we should ban all oil and gas production and use are money to develop more environmentally friendly ways of electricity
There is not a jurisdiction in the world where renewables have lowered energy prices for the consumer before subsidies. On top of that, gutting the oil and gas industry that along with refined products accounted for the top three spots on export valuations for Canada.  I realize that we have a federal government that is encouraging the move away from a resource economy but unfortunately that would deprive the country of an enormous revenue source that has facilitated our standard of living.
Build wind turbines to harvest energy across Canada. Wind is a natural resource here in Canada, especially in Newfoundland. One place in NL that could be a suitable wind turbine location is in the Wreck House near Port aux Basques - in this location we receive some of the highest winds on the island, so collecting and store wind to later convert into energy wouldn't be a problem.
install wind turbines to help generate electricity to help reduce burning of fossil fuels
Make electric cars more available to the public to decrease the amount of Carbon Dioxide being emitted into the atmosphere through Government Subsidies.
Electric cars are a great idea but appear niche only due to their enormous need for rare earth metals. I believe portable power storage technologies (batteries) need further technological breakthroughs with more abundant materials before widespread adoption of the technology is feasible. Additionally, subsidies have to come from taxes and the proposal here is to increase government expenditures (subsidies) to encourage a move away from a heavily taxed commodity (reduced government revenues). As one of the most taxed countries on the planet today, I would be afraid on the consequences to the consumer.
my idea would be to stop the production of gasoline cars and create electricity cars
Please add a date for when we Canada should stop producing gasoline vehicles. 2035 maybe?
And how, exactly would you propose to charge the batteries? If you think the power grid is dependent on coal now, wait until the demands for recharging batteries escalate, particularly as nighttime, when most recharging would occur, solar and wind are least available or reliable.
I did a calculation of what it would take to charge California's cars if they all went electric and used solar. you would need to cover 1/3 of the surface of CA with panels. And the get a lot more sun than Canada.
My father works offshore in the oil and gas industry. I'm well aware he is only working in the industry because that's what he started doing when he was younger, and he became 'trapped', needing to keep with it because he has a family to support. Now, one thing friends and family have said to me has been the question of why Newfoundland doesn't use wind turbines offshore instead. It would potentially give those working offshore already, jobs. I'm ignorant to the realistic nature of wind turbines, especially offshore ones, but shouldn't the thought of wind power here at least cross people's minds?
Wind power is very unreliable. It requires large batteries and/or backup power from other sources (usually Gas or Coal). Check into Australia's and Germany's Wind Power programs and you will see heavily subsidized and low yield for the dollars spent. People may not like it but the best bang for your dollar is Hydro and Nuclear. Newfoundland is perfect for Hydro. Nuclear gets a bad rap, check on how many failures have ever happened to the CANDU reactors.
Promote the use of geothermal heat extraction as it is a clean source of power without any greenhouse gas emissions.
Some areas are very windy and would be great for using wind turbines, especially throughout Newfoundland. It would be a good alternative way of generating electricity.
A environment and climate friendly but also job creating source of power could be solar energy . This energy is almost limitless and very clean . The production and installation of these for example solar panels would create new jobs and the maintenance would also create work . However the space to power an entire town or city would be an issue so maybe starting halfway or just enough to keep up a momentum of change would be more realistic. You could put these panels on homes but then another issue arises especially in a place like Canada . Snowfall and ice can cover and damage this source of energy and endanger those who go out to clean them off . However some level of danger always goes hand and hand with most energy production but accidents can be advoided with proper training and care .
Gradually create selfsustainable communities that produce its own renovable energy and food, where everybody works part time to maintain the comunity. It produces moe food and energy that consumes to trade qith other comunities. Education of ecological, economic, social and cultural values is required.
Sounds like communism, Justin Trudeau would be proud and call you "comrade".
Just as Norway has accumulated over 1 trillion USD from its oil and gas revenues over the span of 30 to 40 years, and funneled that money into a public "legacy" fund for future generations, Canada should also create a similar federal fund. This could receive a portion of provincial oil and gas royalties, but also royalties on other forms of energy, such as big hydro, offshore wind energy generation, etc. Etc. This could be used in future for social services, like old age pension funds, or other services important to the general public.
Canada should spend a little less time trying to be something we are not and bit more time working with what we have. We have a great deal of Oil/gas that should be expropriated and pipelined to tide water. Solar energy etc are great ideas and could be funded by current energy revenues if the federal government would support the energy sector rather than pandering to political agendas in upper Canada etc. 
The current Federal Gov. will never support the oil/gas industry as proved by the changes made by the NEB (another Trudeau burden).
New houses should be built semi-underground to insulate and trap heat more efficiently.Better Insulating materials from natural sources (carbon rich) should be used such as peat that can be farmed, provide jobs and sold to generate income as orchid mix, insulation, soil improvement, packing material and many more. Policies should include phasing out plastic based insulation by 2025 to promote greener alternatives than components of fossil fuels.
Promote and expand the use of this technology
I don't see the advantage to such technology. Those refrigerant chemicals are incredibly expensive.
I would like to see a plan for initial development of a hydrogen fuelling infrastructure that would allow for travel between major communities. This approach would allow for the rational development of fuelling stations to facilitate the deployment of that fuel cell transport trucks. I would also like to see centralized refuelling stations in major urban centres for urban public transit systems  a single refuelling point for city buses. This could be a starting point for the more widespread use of hydrogen as a fuel using fuel cells. I think that this will be an important contribution to a greener future, in combination with other technologies. In saying this, it's important to avoid the tendency to pit one form of energy improvement against another, i.e., I think that the future of transport will not be a question of either battery power or hydrogen fuel cell-based, but a combination of both. For vehicles that require frequent duty with short down time, e.g., city buses and heavy trucks on trunking operations, fuel cell approaches would seem to be more useful than batteries. For cars that will spend most of their life in an urban environment, batteries seem logical. For city buses, predictable routing around close proximity to a refuelling base lends itself to relatively easy installation of the required infrastructure at a central hub. For heavy trucks, it seems that the size of the battery required for an electric vehicle would be prohibitively costly in terms of payload. If genuinely renewable energy is used for the hydrolysis, e.g., solar, wind, and wave power, then hydrogen fuel use really does seem to offer the cleanest and most sustainable approach for the future. There is lots of research being done, and many breakthroughs being achieved, in increasing the energy efficiency of hydrolysis and in doing so using solely renewable energy inputs. These breakthroughs include identification of cheaper, more abundant catalysts and move us closer and closer to emulating natural hydrolysis as occurs in photosynthesis in nature. Some have concerns about hydrogen being dangerous and explosive. However, so is gasoline, yet we have that transported everywhere now and in tanks in our vehicles. Therefore, similar safeguard-based approaches to hydrogen would apply and be acceptable. Experience in California, Japan and Europe supports this. Fuel cell and H2 technology exists, reliability is proven (Ballard buses in London), fuel cells are getting cheaper (ITM Power), and the heavy truck industry is trialling fuel cells (Scania working with Hydrogenics). The infrastructure is needed for our future, but must be planned. Shell is already active in this area. Like the first gasoline vehicles, there was no broad network of fuel stations when they first arrived, so theres no reason why we cant make this happen  but it will require planning. One final thought: using renewable energy for hydrolysis would eliminate the reliance on current geographic locations of fossil fuels, many of which are in environmentally sensitive areas and/or which are in areas hard to access (and physically dangerous). Given this, using hydrogen as a fuel source in conjunction with mobile and static fuel cells, every single country could become energy independent in due course. In terms of the planning to facilitate this, we could at the very least begin by identifying ideal locations throughout our road infrastructure for filling stations that would allow for refuelling for highest frequency truck routes.  California has developed a hydrogen highway on a similar basis.  Following this, debate could be pursued about the potential for subsidizing initial infrastructure development.  This approach could provide the starting point for further commercial development, ultimately without subsidization as soon as the first network becomes profitable.
I would like to see the Government offer incentives for homeowners and businesses to go into solar energy. They have done this in Britain and now you see lots of solar panels.

In Belgium it's already been put into place. Every house with solar panels sends the energy generated into the system. And when they need energy, they simply take it from the system. This way no energy is ever wasted and everyone can use it.
Industry Challenge One of the key challenges to the rate of growth of the bioenergy industry in Canada is that although information pertaining to biomass supply is available, it is highly fragmented: for bio-project developers, lenders and other industry stakeholders, obtaining relevant information requires accessing multiple sources of varying levels of depth, resolution, granularity, and accuracy. As a result the initial development process for biomass projects is slow and expensive. A centralized database or Hub of the right type of feedstock information relevant to developers and lenders would unlock huge potential in the rate of bio-project development. Accelerating Bio-project Development by Fast-tracking the Validation Phase Every biomass project, whether bio power, biochemical, bioenergy, or bio product, necessarily goes through a feedstock validation phase. In the Validation Phase, project developers / lenders need to:  Obtain a high-level understanding of the quantity quality, cost, competition for biomass resources available within a particular targeted geographic region (i.e. wood fiber, corn stover, sorghum, miscanthus, etc.) and Validate this high level data with more granular on-the-ground discussions with actual local suppliers and transportation companies.  The outcome of the Validation Phase is a go / no-go decision resulting in either deployment of additional time and dollars on a particular location or not. The validation phase is time-consuming, expensive and often a waste of limited development dollars and time: feedstock validation can take 2-3 months per geographic area and developers look at multiple locations before deciding to drill down (in a particular location) or not. 

Not only does this slow down the pace of development, it adds a needless layer of expense and financial drag upon the industry: bio-project developers can spend hundreds of thousands of dollars evaluating potential site locations only to discover that suitable feedstock is not available, that the cost is too high, or competition is too fierce. BiFi Hub will dramatically reduce the time required to gather appropriate validation information from months to hours and eliminate the associated expenses. Acceleration of the rate of bio-industry development is a key goal of federal and provincial governments. An important way to achieve this is to provide easier access for developers and lenders investment grade information in the Validation Phase. Accessibility and transparency of market information is generally regarded as central to the efficiency, liquidity and rate of development of any market. Better and easier access information can also serve as key inputs to improved decision-making by project developers, financial institutions, government, and other industry stakeholders. This is particularly important in developing industries where the rate of development has been directly linked with the availability and accessibility of vital market information. Information aggregation and transparency initiatives, for example, have been key to rapid development of the pellet industry in Canada in recent years.  Hub Architecture and Data BiFi Hub will contain only data layers important for project developers and lenders to validate the viability of biomass feedstock supply and to speed project development. 7 data layers will be developed and for each of 5 categories of biomass feedstock: Forestry harvest and processing residue, Agricultural residues, Renewable Energy crops, Livestock manure and processing waste, and Food-based organic biomass (see Figure 1 in attached doc) Project Objectives The objective of BiFi Hub is to enable users to:  Determine Feedstock Availability:  Confirm the availability of sufficient quantities biomass within the project supply basin; Make a high-level projection of the minimum Biomass Availability Multiple.   Understand Feedstock Price  Determine the low / high cost of feedstock historically.   Gauge Competition  Map the location of major suppliers in relation to project site, and annual feedstock intake.  

 Start a conversation with real suppliers on a local level  Give contacts of actual suppliers of relevant feedstock.    Impacts and Outcomes The project outcome will be a deployment of a publicly available, powerful, validated, easily accessible, GIS and web-based platform which will enable developers, commercial lenders, government and other bio-industry stakeholders to make quick, accurate, high-level decisions related to feedstock. BiFi Hub will solve the issue of fragmented information that is currently a main cause of slow bioenergy project development in Canada. BiFi Hub will dramatically decrease the time and expense of the Validation Phase for bio-projects. By so doing, it will unlock significant development potential in the bioenergy space and increase the rate of development of bioenergy projects in Canada. Better availability of relevant information may further accelerate industry development by attracting international developers and lenders who are less familiar with the Canadian market and might otherwise avoid or delay participation.

 Unlike many technological advances in the bioenergy space which benefit only a single industry sector, the impact of this project is accretive and immediately transferrable across the full spectrum of the bio-based industries: the benefits will impact bioenergy, advanced biofuels, bio-based heat and power, and pellet production, among others. Enhancing the availability and accessibility of important supply chain information is obviously not a panacea for all issues causing sluggish development of bio-based initiatives in Canada today, and clearly many market participants already have their own means of acquiring feedstock information on which to base development decisions. Still, if rapid increase of the rate of national bio-based development is an important goal, it is clear that transparency and accessibility of relevant information is key to achieving it. BiFi Hub is the logical step to eliminating an important barrier to bio-project development in Canada.

Reducing/ eliminating taxes on zero/ low emission modes of transportation like bikes and hybrid cars
A solar panel should be mandated to be put into all new home builds, as well as commercial new builds.   
Any idea what a solar panel system costs? the batteries required to store what energy might be collected on a snow covered maybe 5 hrs of sunlight(winter time in the northern hemisphere) panel. Ask your electric company what it costs to install a buyback meter when you sell the excess power your system produced. Take a look at California...many homes that are off the grid are still receiving bills from electric companies, state government implemented a bill to help compensate electricity producers for loss of revenues from "off the grid homes/businesses".

Solar panels We installed solar panels a year ago, unfortunately the Transmission and Distribution charges in are area make sure solar is not economical. The powers that be need to change the whole electrical system. Our T and D charges remain the same no matter how much electricity we use and are most of our monthly charge. We could use no electricity and since we are connected to the grid our T and D charges are still about $50 per month. This does nothing to promote electricity conservation. We have an ideal location for solar panels but are restricted to having only enough panels to generate as much electricity as we consume in a year. Why restrict the amount of solar we generate. More folks generating solar electricity and sending it to the grid, should mean up grades to the system wouldn't be needed as soon or maybe not at all. To make solar more economical all I need is to have T and D charges calculated by the amount of electricity taken from the grid, user pay.

We need to take advantage of our existing resources while the promising new energy technologies are developing, as renewables currently make no sense as mainstream power supplies. We need to sell our oil to generate cash for our country, and use our natural gas toproduce electricity. Remember how nuclear power was going to become the power of the future? Solar and wind power have very serious negative side effects and are ridiculously expensive. We need to assess Canada's needs first, THEN global or we risk putting ourselves at an economic disadvantage for decades. What "feels good" today needs to be set aside for what is truly best for Canada in the long run. If we are going to make a massive "green shift" those areas that are burdened with the negative impact of this must be PROACTIVELY compensated for that CHOICE, because it is NOT a necessity

 Renewable Energy is cheaper to produce than dirty fuel (unless coal, gas, or nuclear are subsidized by government). I strongly urge consumers to investigate and stop believing the fabricated narratives that are being sold people who don't believe in independent critical thinking and research. 
Taxing Carbon is IMHO strictly a govt and climate change inspired income source. Cash cow. I do not believe for a nano second that man can effect climate change. We can reduce pollution but affect climate change. Not a chance. No history available to prove man has changed the climate up or down. Ever.
Climate change is so badly defined as to be useless. What the definition implies is that it can get hotter or colder and whichever way it goes is mans fault. This is rediculous and nothing but a cop-out when the climate models prove inaccurate. As a scientist, I see much of what is published being selectively chosen to support the conclusion in much the same way that a drunk uses a lamp post, for support rather than illumination.
https://climate.nasa.gov/evidence/ The current warming trend is of particular significance because most of it is extremely likely (greater than95 percentprobability)to be the result of human activity since the mid-20thcenturyand proceeding at a rate that is unprecedented over decades to millennia.1 Satellites and other technological advances have enabled scientists to see the big picture, collecting many different types of information about our planet and its climate on a global scale. This body of data, collected over many years, reveals the signals of a changing climate. Your relying on emotion or opinion. But even if 97% of scientists are wrong - why would you want to live in smog and pollution?
KB your argument is flawed... Satellite technology hasn't been used for millennia as suggested, ice core samples from the high Arctic and Antarctica have provided air quality history for thousands of years they show "CYCLES" of warming and cooling. Fossilized remains of Palm trees have been found in the Arctic. Enough with the "false" news. 
CO2 is NOT pollution!
It isnt false news ... you just do not agree with NASA scientists or Nobel prize winners. Cool. But until you show me credible and peer reviewed research that you base your opinion on...it doesnt matter
KB, The 97% myth has been debunked. it was a poll taken by a celebrity/website jockey John Cook, asking for papers to be submitted for a study. He then cherry picked the papers that were slightly to very favorable to AGW. He then polled these scientists on whether they believed the climate changed. I'm actually more concerned the number wasn't 100% because if you don't believe the climate changes then you're note very observant. There are all kinds of reputable sites that point out the fraud that the 97% statement is.
All city public transportation should be integrated so that you can go from one mode (commuter train for example) to another (subway system or bus) and from one city to another where possible. More money should be spent on building subways and rail lines instead of highways.
Help all Canadians recognize the incredible resources we control and the environmentally progressive way we are producing them, for the benefit of our citizens and the world. Pushing renewables is regressive, relying on poor, unreliable and expensive technologies (solar, wind) which increases energy costs, falling directly on the poorest members of society. Further, high energy prices deter industry, costing economic development and jobs for the people who need them the most!
Remove equalization payments so that the rest of Canada realizes the transition to renewable energy isn't free and electric cars are not attainable through EI so stop trying to kill canada' s economy. Develop our resources with a carbon tax that goes directly into renewable R&D and at a level that doesn't send even more investment out of our country.
more renewable energy
Stop focusing on expensive replacements for what we already have... let the free market expand and flourish.... As this happens we will be able to eliminate our huge debt ridden government into a lean and powerful one who can afford to experiment with with all sorts of alternative energy and thoughts.... Right now you are just making us uncompetitive.....
Free market is the States causes recessions and unrest due to inequality.  I believe people should be forced to learn history and modern economics before they are allowed to vote.
Scrap the Parkway idea for Peterborough. Increase the number of bike Lanes. Use electric vehicles where feasible for public transportation.
Its a fact that Canada currently spends $35 million a day importing foreign oil from countries such as China, Saudi Arabia, Nigeria and Venezuela where there are no ethics regarding human rights or environmental protection. We could provide this oil ourselves saving this money and generating more!!! Canada and Alberta oil is the cleanest and safest oil used on the planet with Canada having less than 2% of the total world's emissions. China is over 35%. Energy East may be just one pipeline but it will have a dramatic impact on Canada: 14,000 jobs during development and construction; $55 billion contributed to Canadas GDP; $10 billion in federal and provincial taxes  money for health care and more teachers; and Allow Canadian oil to move from west to east and beyond in the safest and most environmentally-friendly way possible and allow Canada to stop supporting terrorist countries and anti-human rights. Trudeau wants to get more money from Small Business and from Canadians - why not build the desperately required Pipeline and Unite Canada like we did with the Railroad - create jobs and create Money for Canada. We could also reduce our emissions by no longer having oil tankers show up on our shores spewing waste and pollution into Canadian air space. Or no we can continue to buy Dirty, Anti-Humanitarian, Terrorist,Environmentally unfriendly oil from outside Canada. Well being Canadian I'm pretty sure Trudeau and the rest of the completely uninformed environmentalist Canadians will choose outside oil over our own clean and safe product. 
You are right that There is No way to understand to import crude. Use yours instead.
We should have a boycot to dirty unethical products including oil. Our governments are hypicrical.
Canada is a great country and has been blessed with natural resources. Does it make senses that we import and process crude from other countries and not develope our own resources? 
Increase public transportation to and out of Toronto for those that live in surrounding areas such as Milton, Hamilton, and Stoney Creek. This would alleviate the amount of drivers on the road and 401 traffic. It would also be a good way to reduce carbon footprints.
If Canada's government continues to ruin the existing economy that provides absolutely everything that makes every ones lives comfortable by trashing the oil and gas industry, there will be no change of surviving to become a renewable energy based country. While Canada is self destructing the most important asset in our country (oil and gas) the rest of the world are capitalizing on theirs and when Canada has collapsed they will be in good shape to sell us our energy. We just won't have any money to buy their energy as our economy will be in the toilet and our ability to create our own energy will have long been destroyed. Renewable energy is of course the goal and over the next 100 years we may perhaps be partly able to rely on it. But our government seems determined to try to kill oil and gas decades before we have proper viable alternatives. That will kill Canada and empower other countries who are exploiting their natural resources with a realistic view of when and how they may be replaced.
Our country is slowly being sold to foreign interests.  They will develop the resources at will and on demand  Our government t will have so say. Sell outs. 
Make people wear multiple layers of clothing instead of heating their home.
Vancouver is banning natural gas so they are well on the way back to the caveman era. I would love to close the valve on Transmountain pipeline for a couple weeks and see how they make out in the middle of winter without any oil! 
Generate electricity by burning wood since it is green.
We should indeed burn wood. Thunder Bay has a clean wood fired plant as the carbon emitted into the environment is absorbed by the nearby environment is a complimentary manner. Not many trees are required to keep the plant going in regards to the nearby forest,
Require that all capital projects nationwide receive federal approval of lifetime emissions to ensure effective management. Strike committees that seek public opinion coast to coast with a three year approval process for all proposed projects. All applicants for projects would need to account and be responsible for carbon taxes through the lifetime of the project. Exceptions should not be given with approvals applying equally to the oil and gas, auto, aerospace, construction and agriculture industries.
Absolutely ridonkeylous, you use natural gas to heat your home? When you flush your toilet just where and how do you think your business goes when you hit that little lever on your throne? When you go to your kitchen sink to get a glass of water, how does that get to your tap?
We should emulate North Korea. Have you ever seen satellite imagery of the country at night. It's really dark. No wasted energy there and the bonus is that we keep those greedy capitalists from making a profit off someone else's back.
LOL
With Turdo in charge we should be there in no time.....
You are a joke. We should not emulate those bass a clear ds folk.
The free market can better allocate resources than government entities can. Stop bailouts Stop the Carbon tax Listen to what MurrayRothbard, Ludvig von Mises, Henry Hazlitt, Milton Friedman and F.A. Hayek has to say about government policies.
Less government ... much less. 
I'm a bit disappointed in the lack of leadership from the federal government regarding elimination of the massive amount of oil tanker traffic in the St Lawrence. 80 million litres of foreign crude oil is shipped there every day. The energy east pipeline would have solved that plus kept Billions of dollars out of the hands of corrupt regimes with poor environmental standards and even worse human rights standards.  All to appease a few selfish noisemakers like mayor Denis. Pure politics.
Besides that St Lawrance sea way is the place that sewer dumped into by the city of Montreal. This is the case that studied by some universities around the world.
 Its far cheaper on the east coast to import oil then it is to transport oil across Canada from Alberta in Ontario.
There is no way to accept years of reviews to build a pipeline. There is science and engineering behind it. Instead of selling crude itself, value must be added which is called petro chemicals. Alberta is the best place to refine its sources. And to export them other than US. Best refinery must be build where the sources are.
Add renewable power generation sources such as solar, wind and hydroelectric with energy storage systems for remote communities being powered by diesel generation. Since the diesel infrastructure is there already it could be left as a backup energy source that can be used in emergencies. The goal would be to use 100% renewable energy sources in all communities that are too remote to have access to the electrical grid.
LOL solar energy in northern Canada... what are these communities gonna do in the dead of winter with maybe 5 hrs of sunlight? Wind power... LOL, take a look at the wind mill farms in southern Alberta less then 10% of the turbines are in operation, even during the hottest days of summer when everyone has the A/C on full... one would think there would be more then 10% of those turbines spinning to produce the electricity's higher demand... nope they imported at ridiculous rates BC. There are several wind farms across North America with reduced turbines actually operating due to breakdowns, lack of parts to make repairs and the costs to make those repairs. So, when those solar panels are covered with snow and only getting 4 or 5 hrs of questionable sunlight, those "remote Communities" will be relying on diesel generators 9-10 months of the year.
The dead of winter is the problem. The water is frozen( hydro power) the sun is not out long enough ( solar ) Wind if there is enough.Are the turbines dependable? I know that in the Netherlands they run the entire railway system on it. I think it would be your best bet. is it affordable and easy to maintain?
It's fair to say there are some challenges. But regarding snow and solar panels, Ottawa hydro did a study in 2010 and concluded a tilt of 45 degrees was sufficient to make the snow slide off. Optimal solar-PV tilt angle and azimuth: An Ontario(Canada) case-study Ian H. Rowlands, Briana, Paige, Kemery, Ian Beausoleil-Morrison Energy Policy 39(2011) 13971409
Have the current batch of bench warmers (that's the current fed government) resign, turn the leadership of this once great nation back to a nation of greatness like it was 2 years ago. Allow pipelines to both the west and east coast. Have NEB cleared of Liberal sheep. Canada's climate goals? Ha... those are comrade Trudeau's gaols, not Canada's goals.
Generate more programs, like Planet Protector Academy for elementary children to educate them to become earth-minded citizens. If they are taught young, they will think green and continue to move energy saving initiatives forward. 
We waste a lot of energy in our landfills. Most of that can be recaptured.  Even the methane produced should be captured.  Our grandparents were the best of the recyclers.  It's amazing to me how this infinity has been lost.  Because it's cheaper to buy a fridge new than it is to fix one that's what we do. Insane. And then we throw it in the dump.  As if the parts have no value.  Which they do. 
it would be great to see how much energy could be used by converting organic waste - humans and animal feces and food waste - into energy that can be used at home, through combustion or decay. 
Making home water purification easy & cost-affordable. This would increase our water supply by cleaning grey or used water for reuse.
In response to Global Climate Change, there has been a requirement towards Waste-to-Energy technologies to produce alternative/ clean energy from waste feedstocks, such as MSW, industrial waste, medical waste, biomass waste, sewage sludge, used tires, etc. Typically, the waste is sent to landfills and the energy in waste is essentially lost, creating mountains of trash, emitting harmful pollutants into our air, water, and soil. The waste feedstock can be a cost-effective and environmentally sound supply of clean energy source and replace a portion of fossil fuels. Non-recyclable waste products (e.g. contaminated plastic, paper, diapers, medical waste, waste biomass, anaerobic digestion and industrial byproducts, etc.) are very difficult to recycle and reuse. Therefore, a Circular Economy should include the use of effective waste-to-energy technologies to extract energy from non-recyclable waste. The waste, potentially, can be transformed to various forms of clean energy products, such as electricity, hydrogen, liquid synthetic fuels, and green chemicals. The primary challenge of these technologies is the heterogeneous nature of waste, which creates a widely varying chemical constituency of the energy products generated from these processes. An effective Waste-to-Energy technology application in combination with a reliable scrubbing/ cleaning system can provide a solution for waste disposal and clean energy production. https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/perspectives-waste-to-energy-technologies-zoltan-kish-ph-d-?trk=pulse_spock-articles
Bring back the Hemp Industry. Plain and simple. Seeds, H2O, Reap.So many Bi Products.
Paper, clothing, yarn, rope only a few items it can be used for. Totally renewable.
We should institute a foreign oil tax, particularly from countries that do not have environmental controls equal to those that the Canadian Oil Industry is expected to maintain. As well, the risks of transportation to the world environment, should also affect which countries we tax, in order to provide a sinking fund against future environmental disasters.
Absolutely! If the Feds want to kill Energy East then they also need to consider all the bad stuff associated with foreign oil coming into eastern Canada. Tax it until nobody can drive a car in eastern Canada.
 We should take after the U.K. And try to at least cut down on how many petrol cars there are investment in electric cars, as well as alternative fuel sources incentives for purchasing more fuel efficient cars, electric cars a crack down on lobbying for oil companies within the government more investment in SOLAR energy encourage more Canadians to compost- more cities Make commercials on ways Canadians can lesson their carbon footprint: ex: using glass jars to buy bulk foods, using reusable bags, properly understanding recycling, donating clothes (re:textile waste), etc. 
Service stations now have decided to charge for tire inflation many using inferior compressors. If it were a municipal or better yet a provincial law that stations that are licensed to sell fuel must provide a tire inflator compressor preferably with a storage tank for air so that people will be less inclined to run inadequately inflated tires. Under inflated tires cause more rolling resistance and contribute to poor fuel economy. Low tire pressure also greatly decreases tire life and therefore more tires are damaged and put into landfill.This would be a very inexpensive and easy service to provide and would benefit the consumer and the environment at minimal cost.  
A great idea, and simple to implement. You want to sell fuel? Must provide working air pump for free tire inflation.
Governments should disincentivize the consumption of high environmental impact foods such as dairy and especially meat. These environmental and health culprits are too often conveniently ignored by governments for purely political reasons (powerful lobbying, political support by meat and dairy industries, etc.) There are low impact plant based alternatives to these foods. Soft drinks could be included for similar reasons.
We need foods such as milk and meat. Canada is Co2 neural as it is. Mr.Roy sound like he may be vegan. 
You need to eat a lot of plant food tobe as full as eating meet. Especially if you're talking about meat while cow is especially harmful on the environment chicken is not and as such is a n exceptional alternative to cow.
I agree with Jeffery about cows. Whether raised for meat or dairy, cows are among the worst environmental "offenders" in food production but that's only because of us. We can make better choices for the environment, our health and prevent undue suffering but realistically it has to be gradual.
We can make eliminating the use of non-renewable energy a thing of the past if the governing bodies do something to ensure the affordability of green energy such as solar and wind.
What, you want even more taxpayers' money wasted on subsidies for solar and wind? Does everyone think money for these costly subsidies comes out of thin air?
That was a terrible survey, probably done by someone in grade 6. Waste of taxpayers money, stupid questions plus survey doesn't work well on mobile device.
Very difficult to do survey on I phone. Questions are not clear. Very simple we need oil and gas for a long time yet. Makes life simpler for producers. Many people who complaint do not seem to have to produce anything. How do think think money is made. We are listening to winners and taxing workers to poverty.
The government should make it mandatory for all new homes to have a way of generating power using a sustainable energy source. Solar is the most likely candidate as it becomes more affordable and more reliable, and more efficient. It would save tax payers money on skyrocketing hydro prices and scams from companies offering fixed hydro prices. It would also reduce the reliance on hydro system infrastructure that is aging, running at capacity, and in need of many upgrades or repairs.
What may be affordable to one is out of price range for another. Energy sources need to be plentiful and affordable for the least fortunate in our society. Oil still comes in as number 1. 
There's no such thing as a net zero house. You would have to generate yourself all the energy you would need through wind, solar without creating your own efficient grid which is far out of the price range of average people. Nuclear is our best option for base load energy with gas, sun, and wind energy making up the spikes
There is solar and wind technologies that could be incorporated into new construction, but perhaps builders need some better government incentives to make this happen. Maybe we should all invest in renewable energy companies instead of nonrenewable ones.
One of the major challenges here is we can install solar, geothermal or wind at our own site but then need to still hook up to the grid for backup during downtimes (no wind, it is dark, etc). The current power companies lose the majority of theirsales and are required to be backup only. This radically changes their business model which is already in turmoil with the coal plants being retired early. I think they would complain mightily or have to be compensated in a large way.
Continue rebates on electric cars.
There should not be a larger rebate for sled electric cars as those Concerned about electrical usage should be buying used vehicles as even tesla electric vehicles have a large impact on the environment purely through vehicle production.
Electric cars make no sense in Canada, so they aren't viable without subsidies. So sure, waste even more of the taxpayers' money on a non-viable mode of transport. Besides, where is the electricity to charge all of these useless cars supposed to come from?
Try and promote people to walk, bike, use public transport or do rideshares to work to reduce the emissions produced through a tax credit, such as a credit for not owning a vehicle in large metropolitan areas or by milahe in more rural areas
This sounds like another Government subsidy program. Who is paying for it? you? To encourage people to walk bike or car pool you need to create a willingness not based on subsidy programs. Or people living in rural communities end up paying for subsidy programs in urban areas.Not fair! 
Simpler future is a more energy efficient future without sacrifice is possible! Container ships and planes use tons of fossil fuels unnecessary! Also trains and tractor trailers! Lower the amount of each for transporting goods that can be created on a specific continent or locality! Restructuring the world trading and economy with this in mind is possible and can be massively profitable as well. This may sound impossible, it defies conventional system and practices. Also less trading globally sounds less profitable for everyone but no. Shipping costs are massive with all aspects included! Environment and time must be included as well! With the oceanic and weather more unpredictable and dangerous less ships and planes is inevitable future! With fossil fuels diminishing supports the theory as well! So the logical solution is simply a restructuring to a more mindful continental trading practices! It's a win win win win for all sectors! It's very complicated idea I'm putting forth that goes deep into the core of the way manage from top of the world banking sector to the bottom simple persons household! The idea works seemlessly with making a greener world a more profitable world. So I put forth this, why would we not restructure!? Money, people and enviroment all win big! Inevitably this economy ,we as world community have,will have to change due to many factors in and out of our control unfortunately. So the proactive ,rational solution is to reform the way we all do business. The idea of buying local is attainable to be lamen on a grossly in depth and complicated idea. In summary, a restructure of a new world economy. Profits, or should I say savings in shipping costs. An economy that earth can actually sustain, by reducing shipping in all the major conventional ways planes, container ships transport trucks and trains! Continental trading, the future trading system whether we like it or lump 
This is wrong in a number of ways. Adam Smith developed the idea of the Division of Labour, learned that through production specialization more goods can be produced at a higher quality at a smaller cost. Shipping costs are also going down, not up, in all forms. The arctic passage above Canada will soon be open to ships year round slashing the cost of ships from China. Trucking is becoming cheaper as hydrogen cells, electric, and driverless trucks will soon hit the markets. The rise in oil has been pushing aircraft manufacturers, including our Bombardier, to develop more and more efficient engines. The Bombardier CSeries was a great step improvement, shame they underestimated how fast Boeing could develop a better engine. Trains have the potential to be one of the greenest forms of transport but they're being held back not by technology but beurocracy in how the rails are shared and amount of them. The mag trains in particular are of great interest.
millions of cars idle unnecessarily each day belching hundreds of tons of carbon into the air so people can get a coffee. It is wasteful lazy and bad for our health.
I feel like this really won't be an issue when hybrids and electric cars take over, or even when the bulk of cars use stop-start engine systems (which nearly all new cars sold today use)
I agree with Gordon Ellis. Stop start engines reduce this problem substantially, and hybrids typically run electric below 30 km/h. One wonders if drive through ordering might be made more efficient using GPS, traffic ETA prediction, and an app with a menu. Or proximity sensing (Google physical web project) and a menu app.
we need to not only encourage municipalities to build bicycle friendly roads and trails, but we need to make individual commitments to actually use them.
Try solar panels on the roof
I have lived in sunny areas of the country, including the Saskatchewan prairies, southern Alberta, and the Okanagan, and I've seen very little solar power being used. If it's not already being done, we should take inventory of the sunniest places in Canada and provide incentives to people to turn their rooftops into solar energy collectors. In places like Southwest Saskatchewan, where oil has just been discovered, farmers need to see solar and wind power as more lucrative alternatives. Individuals may be persuaded to feed energy into the grid with personal wind turbines if there were affordable options. If we all do a little to collect and share energy, we could end our dependence on mega projects like Site C.
Renewables r definitley the way to go!
Oil has been produced in Southwest Saskatchewan for likely over 50 years, not sure what you mean by "just discovered". The farmers on whose land oil production happens doesn't come up with the idea. The oil company does its economic model, weighs the risks of spending millions, and then approaches the farmer with a compensation agreement for the use of a small patch of farm or ranchland. I do not see solar power companies approaching this farmer with a similar compensation agreement just yet. I would assume it is because their economic model does not support it (too expensive for the cash flow benefits). Technology has to become cheaper, and not just with a subsidy. Ontario has shown us if you stimulate an entire industry with FIT (feed-in-tariffs, ie. guaranteed energy prices) you do not foster innovation. Back to that farmer: he is a farmer, and has a model of business as well. Whatever is proposed has to work for him too. Not just out of the goodness of his heart.
The fact that the Provincial & Federal Governments are taxing carbon, which is essential to our everyday life, without another viable & affordable option is ridiculous.
Hybrid and electric vehicles are rapidly becoming a viable option. Pretty much everyone who lives in a city (90%+ of Canada's population) could switch to electric cars and never have to worry about range issues in their daily lives.
The carbon "tax" will do nothing to curb the demand for oil and natural gas. It is simply a tax grab, one more way for governments that spend beyond their means to suck the life out of the taxpayer.
Apart from air travel and snowmobiles, viable options now exist or are in the works for virtually every form of consumer activity, including transit, bicycles, electric vehicles, electric garden tools, electric barbeques, andair and ground source heat pumps. The price on carbon helps to foster innovation and the development of further non-polluting options for things such as trucks and boats (which are in the works and getting less expensive as the scale of production increases).
Installing ev charge stations at government buildings would show that our government is actually serious about wanting to make a positive impact on the environment, instead of just making empty speeches.
Ev charge stations should indeed be built everywhere. There competitor hydrogen cells proved to be too unstable to be truly useful.
How about each government office publishing what their progress is on GHG emissions targets. I tried to find the province of Alberta's progress and the city of Calgary's. The city has some goals, and have failed miserably at meeting them. Not sure if the provincial government has targets even. This does not instill much confidence. Maybe their emissions are reduced but they are just not reporting it. But I doubt it.
With internet connections improving more and more, having the ability to work from home is going to be paramount. Increasing the availability of high speed internet in rural communities can help reduce the need for people to commute period. This is can be built upon past what I'm mentioning here obviously.
This topic should be included in primary and secondary schooling. I think it would be beneficial to have students learn about it and the effects of going green more in-depth.
How green are our schools? I mean from a GHG emissions per person standard, not LEED, or recycle progress. Have our GHG emissions been reduced over time or are they increasing on a per student basis. I agree this should be part of our curriculum in some way but it also has to be part of the way we live.
We have become a throw-away society. Let's challenge manufacturers to make products last longer instead of just being energy efficient. Perhaps manufacturers need to provide longer warrenties and enable parts to have the ability to be fixed rather than replaced.
It would also be nice if ALL packaging materials were easily recyclable.
make public transit more convenient and more affordable i think a city driving tax, like a $20 charge/car to use the gardiner or DVP are good ideas and will encourage people to use transit, also reducing traffic look to other major cities in the world for ideas
International markets aside, we could easily supply within our own borders and support ourselves, without the need of importation. Our overspending and ever increasing debt with the latest estimate to pay it down for 2060, scares me. Im no financial wizard by any means, but keeping it in-house is a no brainer. The latest downturn has tasked the industry and efficiencies have come to play which has reduced our production costs, albeit to a small degree, but the potential exists to take this to the next level, and as Canadians we are at the forefront of this technology. The writing is on the wall with major E&Ps pulling the pin on Canada. The libtards are shortsighted and are only looking at the popularity contest of the next election. We are losing the battle as Albertans, and this evidence is sound. The NEP wasnt quite enough to kill the west, but (turdope) is going to do his best to follow his fathers footsteps and hammer that last nail in our coffin...
Unfortunately, eastern interests will always trump what is best for Canada as a whole. Oil and natural gas will remain a vital energy source for Canadians for the foreseeable future. The federal government is doing whatever it can to destroy our oil/gas industry, while pretending to be supportive. It is short-sighted, dishonest, and divides the country.
For as long as its production is economically viable, bitumenshould be upgraded in Alberta (to avoid the dangers associated with the shipment of dilbit by either rail or pipeline and to create jobs in Alberta) and should be refined in Canada for use here. Alberta has the best solar resources in Canada and great wind and geothermal potential. It is well positioned to transition to renewable energy production as the world electrifies transportation, space heating and other current uses for fossil fuels.
Think of different ways to move yourself. Take transit and walk when it makes sense. Look at a bike share program. Be the change you want in this world!
To create a healthier environment and reverse the damage we have done to this planet and ourselves we need to concentrate on the circle of life. For example a tree grows and at the end of the season its leaves fall on the ground to feed it self over the winter months. Weve become creatures who throw everything away. Yet the problem is there isnt an away that is biological correct for most items within the circle of life. Everything we use should be either upcycled or be able to be easily biodegrade (without more harmful emissions) back into the earth. Theres should be little to no packaging on anything. All vecihlesneed to be electric now. The giver should offer a trade in program along side and/or with the current incentive. Housing doesnt need to be so huge! Every material we use comes from this planet. We do not need to use 2,000-3,000 feet of materials and entertainment to house ourselves. Please consider tiny houses and tiny house communities (and make them legal)! They are the best option to help reduce everyones engery foot print; from the use of materials to build the structure to the engery/ water used to run them to the inability to hoard unneeded items (which use up resources and energy). It really comes down to putting ourselves back into the cycle of life.
All vehicles need to be electric? And just where is the power to charge all of those vehicles supposed to come from? Fantasy land?
Refurbish cars by installing solar panels into cars. If this can be done - would save lots of money and save and keep environment clean.
It doesnt take much to put your renewable food scraps in a composter. It feeds the worms which in turn provide us with nutrient rich soil to use in our gardens.
Solar energy and wind mills arent helping the regular consumer save on their energy bills. In fact, I believe theyve been increasing our fees. The long term energy plan needs to be revamped.
I agree that feed in tariffs are not the best model. Wind and solar are currently the fastest growing and least expensive forms of energy. The feed in tariffs of the past have been successful at driving down the costs of renewables but are no longer needed. We should use tax incentives (such as the ITC and the PTC that are available in the US) to spur the further development of wind and solar in Canada with no impact on electricity prices.
Is it really clean?
Oil and gas incentives in the past have typically been in the form of a tax credit of some kind or a preferred tax treatment, AFTER a major investment of some kind that is recognized to have some element of high risk is spent. I agree, FIT's should go, they do not incentivize companies to improve efficiencies. The oil and gas sector used the incentives to grow the economy, relying on market prices. That is what private power companies should have to do as well. Even footing.
Liquid natural gas is a clean fuel, we have an abundance of it we should use it
Electricity is far more efficient, is readily available and is non-polluting. Use of natural gas is not a step forward.
" Electricity is non-polluting" There is that "fake news" again. If electricity is produced from coal or natural gas, it is far from "non-polluting" But of course the truth will never stop the oil/gas haters.
The vast majority of Canadian electricity is non-emitting, and the percentage which is non-emitting is increasing all the time. Electric cars are so efficient that even a small household (e.g., 10 kW) scale solar system can produce enough electricity to power an electric car for 75,000 km per year.
In some provinces, the majority of electricity is from fossil fuels, therefore cars will be GHG net polluters whether electric or internal combustion. That is not going to change quickly. No argument electric cars move pollution from urban centres to remote locations where our power plants are, if that plant is coal or natural gas. Biggest challenge is still that EV's are not suited to much of Canada's needs yet. In the short term, say next 20 years, we could focus on a transition vehicle, say a generation of compressed natural gas or liquified natural gas vehicles. Longer distances, suited to temperatures in Canada, burns cleaner.
Canada becomes a global leader in virtuous energy addressing climate change and meeting the Sustainable Development Goals from: electrical generation to transmission to storage to clean use. We do this by responsibly and sustainably sourcing the raw materials and metals from within Canada, fully engaging northern and Indigenous populations. Internationally, we build the Canadian Brand and adhere to the UN Principles of Human Rights and Business removing any child and abuse from the supply chain.
It's important to have a balanced view when making environmental decisions involving every nation in Canada. Because leaving certain people out can and will have an effect on the environment in which they live.
Having jobs that help the environment in which they live is good for the community. Good moral.
Reduce earlier to be a leader. I think there is an economic opportunity for Canada if we force the issue and foster innovation by choosing to reduce our carbon reduction earlier than planned. Necessity being the mother of invention and all that. Becoming a leader will make Canadian invention a hallmark and economic opportunity for licensing and sales of leading Canadian inventions.
I am grateful that a global economy opens up development for more Countries and lifts more societies out of poverty and further along the development spectrum. I am also glad it opens up markets for Canadian goods. However, we have become less self sufficient regionally. Where once we grew or produced the basic necessities ourselves locally we are now food insecure and less independent. Regionally Canada needs to produce more food and ship less food from far away countries. That shipping is bad for the environment. We need to grow more suitable food locally or regionally. Ship things we can't make or grow but produce more of what we can. It is wasteful for us to ship food from far away and our oceans cannot sustain the current shipping levels and certainly not an increase from further population growth. It's has to slow down. Support local, grow more local, reduce food insecurity throughout Canada. Solar greenhouse technology.
Invest in agriculture!
Importing/exporting is the most efficient solution for markets of Canadian products. If we put up a wall and say we do not wish to import from global providers, say goodbye to many of your creature comforts. In addition, what you have kept will increase in price multiple times over. You are saying you would sacrifice price, comfort, and way of life to "save" the global environment. I think we need to be very careful when we discuss putting up trade walls for green reasons. It can hurt the average Canadian economically.
We can decide what our built environment is where we live, learn, work and play. The way we desire the future is up to those in decision making position to plan. Id like to see all roads have dedicated and seperate bike lanes to allow safety and to create a culture of active transportation that is for the very day person. Im not going to bike in any city with a two foot painted line - Im not that confident. As we increase active transportation we can decrease emissions.
Alberta is blessed with fossil fuels. We should exploit this resource and use existing technology to clean the emissions. Alberta is blessed with fossil fuels. We should exploit every export opportunity we can. Use the wealth generated to advance renewable initiatives. Alberta is blessed with fossil fuels. We are also the slowest to adopt renewables because they dont work with our existing infrastructure and we are recognizing that their is going to be either a) continued subsidization to keep energy prices for skyrocketing and b) their is not the private interest to proceed because we cannot come to agreement on commercial feasibility (agreement on price they receive). Alberta is blessed with fossil fuels. As such, we power our province from fossil fuels. Quebec is blessed with hydro resources. As such, they power their province from hydro resources. See a trend here. Lets not try to force a square peg into a round hole for pure idealistic purposes. Alberta and BC and to a lesser degree Saskatchewan. Eastern provinces dot understand or appreciate this and as such, want nothing to do with fossil fuels. I say that they are being childish, closed minded and intensely hypocritical. Alberta is being attacked and unfairly brandished by its brothers out eat. Shameful Canada shameful. Canada changes the rules part way through regulatory processes. Completely changing he metrics behind all analysis and have inserted unreasonable s to regulatory processes to kill projects they dont agree with. he federal government is being unjustly punitive, blindly arrogant and subjectively driven by their own agendas. Nothing to do with what is good for the country or provinces.
Invest in Solor energy. Its best and safest cheapest resource. Also water is a good source to.
I see this idea as a businessman's perspective. When you say you can use technologies to filter emissions out, I believe we could implement the same advanced technologies to tap renewable energies. So it is clear that both are possible. Now which way we are choosing is what decides our maturity towards handling global concerns.
This is not a "businessman's view". This is a Canadian's view. Each province is blessed with a variety of resources, and that is typically where their economy has been rooted and has grown from over the years. Overall, Canada has a great diversity of resources - coal, oil, gas, hydro, minerals, beef, farmland, diary, tech, aerospace, to name a few. If these were all in one house, I would say, let's green up the fossil fuel use so as to keep our GHG emissions lower. Let's share power and energy sources from east to west, if possible. Lets export and support developing nations, with our well-regulated power/fuels that are developed in a green, well regulated, way using labour that is fairly paid in a democratic society. I think we can put the blinders on and ignore the fact that if our resources are not sold on the open market, other oil and coal and gas is, from much less democratic and less environmentally regulated regions of the world. Or we can open our eyes and think global.
Reduce cost of public transportation. Tax private vehicle owners more. Seed them with a thought they would use active transportation (walking or biking) rather than using their motor vehicle. Have bike only routes.
As a musician - will you help me lug my gear to the bus stop??? I only live a block away from one and its up hill from my house......oh yeah... be there at the stop a 2 AM to help me carry it home............................!
Spoken like big city downtown dweller. We are already taxed with gasoline taxes both federal and provincial plus the carbon tax on top of that then the GST is applied to the taxes as well. A large part of Canada needs vehicles, leave the city and look around.
Ride Sharing reduces GHG by allows individuals to primarily rely on alternatives to private vehicles, but access transportation options when needed. Please allow them!
Animal agriculture produces GHG. Stop subsidizing it with tax dollars.
Hmm stop subsidizing food production, but subsidize renewables. Are they subsidizing animal agriculture? Can you provide some facts?
This makes walking, biking of transport much easier. Worst case if you have to drive - carpool !
And if you cannot?
Buy me a new house close to work - thank you....
Inspire motivate trendset simple living. Back to basics. Have icons speak and make it sought after. This will lead to low wastage lower choices less and prudent consumption of earths resources
How energy is produced and used varies based on where and how you live in Canada (urban/rural; north of 60/south of 60; west coast/Prairies/ Northern Ontario/GTA/Quebec/Atlantic Canada and so on). In order to be able to put Canada's interests as a whole above our regional differences, we need to have national conversations to understand each other better. Canadians need to talk to each other and not past each other. Youth are the future - we need to start there. We need an annual youth conference on energy and the environment, modelled on the vision and mission of Katimavik.
City planners could assist with meeting Canada's climate goals by planning new area development to promote walking, bicycling or taking transit. This could be done through better walking and bicycling paths. Additionally, this could be done by ensuring there are plazas including grocery stores and other necessary services within walking distance from new homes.
Support Alberta and Saskatchewan. All oil and gas for Canada should be from Canadian sources. NEVER buy oil from foreign countries. Build pipelines to get Canadian oil to Canadian refineries and out to the world market. Stop transfer payments from Alberta to provinces who don't support ONE Canada. 
Canadian governments atall levels SHOULD NEVER succumb to the pressure from special interest groups who have been generated from U.S. organizations such as Tides and the Rockefeller groups to name but a few. These groups have one agenda - U.S. energy independence OF North American Oil & Gas assets. The mandates of these organizations is to land-lock Canadian Oil & Gas development to ensure Canadians do not receive fair market value for our resources. This is intolerable, particularly since the Canadian government subsidizes these "charities". Disgraceful is only a start!
A law must be passed to ban all foreign funding to environmental & anti oil groups along with transparency list of all donors. Follow the money to see who and which governments are funding the killing of the Canadian oil/gas industry. I bet that would be shocking.
Shift subsidies away from high carbon footprint indistries, but ensure they are applied in the same regions to mitigate the temporary employment challenges this may cause.
My sense is comments regarding government subsidies are aimed at benefits accruing to fossil fuel resource development companies. The benefits I am aware of that are currently available are a low resource royalty until a mega project pays out, and I am not sure what else right now. Previously the tax law allowed exploration expenditures (ie. funds actually spent) to be deducted 100% in the year spent if the project resulted in a failure or a success, as it was deemed high risk and this was therefore some softening of the tax blow (the "CEE or Canadian Exploration Expense" deduction) but this was revised to only be deductible in one year should the investment be unsucessful. The 2017 budget document actually stated "Success rates for exploratory drilling have increased substantially since the 1990's and, in a majority of cases, discovery wells now lead to production..." How kind of the government to have assessed our risk in an entire industry in one sentence. Not even footing!
This may sound like a crazy idea but we could have homes and even businesses that are plugged in to gym equipment such as treadmills, ellipticals, stationary bikes, and even if someone could figure out how, various weight lifting machines. Of course they could be hybrid homes/businesses that are plugged into solar energy or other types of clean energy, especially for those who can't necessarily use gym equipment for various reasons. But this type of "exercise energy" could be free and hopefully encourage people to exercise more and therefore lead healthier lifestyles. I feel like with the right people to develop this idea further and make it easy to transition current homes and businesses, this could be a win win on many fronts. Gyms could sell the energy generated by their equipment, people could maybe have individual "energy I.D.s" and "collect" (with an app or a card or something connected to their I.D.s) the energy they generate wherever they go and have it redirected to their home or something like that... anyway, it needs work but I think it could go somewhere. There would have to ve a way to make machines affordable for everyone, and the machine themselves should be built with recycled materials to keep things green. All this to say, it would help with health and fitness, climate change, saving the environment, individual goals...
If you look it up, you can make your own bicycle that charges car batteries in series. It's not a very useful system, more just a toy. People don't generate enough energy to make it useful. Solar panels would be more efficient use of money and would make more electricity. Sorry
I am afraid many of us would freeze to death in the winter due to our couch-potato status. Intriguing idea however. Perhaps it could be structured like a tax benefit that you receive if you participate in fitness through reduced fossil fuel transportation use. Then, does it become more efficient?
If we have to start paying a carbon tax, I feel all the money generated from the tax should be available as credits on individual collector cards. It would be like a reward card with low carbon options to encourage GHG reductions. It would allow the credits to be made avaible to the people or businesses that are paying the tax. It would encourage people to change habits instead of it being used as another source of income for governments. Individuals or business could use the credits towards for led bulbs, electric vehicles , solar panels, wind turbines, and heat pumps.
If solar panels were put on schools, hospitals, libraries and other government buildings we would be able to generate sustainable energy. Schools would be a great start. Students could learn about solar panels, they could track how much energy their school produces, where they rank in the region/province/country. The students could see that people are making changes to better the world. That could be a driving force in their own lives. Plus the schools could earn a portion of the money they make from the sale of the energy to the grid for school use.
Hydrogen pipeline across Canada uniting the country in clean energy to create the hydrogen highway of the future. Along with geothermal https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geothermal_power_in_Canada. Utilize high potential areas such as shown in this map of BC http://www.cangea.ca/bc-geothermal-resource-estimate-maps.html. Build smaller non invasive more energy efficient dams. Small less invasive wind turbines that are high efficiency. Energy efficiency in home Building. Tiny homes built with Tank-less on demand water heaters, Ductless home heating, rain water collectors. High efficiency  subsides for appliances  such as induction heating stoves. High efficiency washer dryers. Use solar water heaters. Better Insulation for all buildings in terms of durability fire resistance.  Build.High capacity storage batteries for solar panels that are 100% recyclable and non toxic.  Build electric and solar cars that are made of 100% recyclable non toxic materials, and have high battery capacity storage that can endure both extreme hot and cold conditions. Solar cars with a film that covers the shell of the car that absorbs more energy than just a single panel would.  Have centralized garden of food grown in greenhouse  in larger cities to reduce importing of vegetable from other countries and provinces. IGA introduces the largest organic supermarket green roof garden in the country https://www.iga.net/en/press_room/communiques_2017/iga_introduces_the_largest_organic_supermarket_green_roof_garden_in_the_country  For the lower mainland BC sky-train out to Abbostford Hope Chilliwack  built in between the two opposing lanes of highway #1 as there is plenty of space and would be the least invasive means of increasing public transit other than more  energy efficient electrical or hydrogen buses. Move government subsides to support clean energy, and organic farming.  End commercial bottling of water such Nestle in Hope BC that uses millions of liters of water and pays very little money cents on thousands of liters. This is a Massive Drain on the water table.  Massive bottling of water should be for emergency purpose only and the bottle should be 100% natural material such as cellulose.  Satellite phone services to all communities in Canada, that would allow for elimination of all cell towers, and would work in all emergency disaster situations.
One problem with Hydrogen is that it is an extremely small molecule and prone to leaks and violent explosions. The slightest leak in seals will cause problems. Induction is good but they need special (iron) pots which can confound some as to why they won't work, also the price is too expensive for induction. I can buy a $70 induction plate or $3000 for a stove. The problem is not with the tech, subsidies, it's that producers of this tech refuse to lower prices, for various reasons, including keeping high-paying jobs and CEO salaries and bonuses at companies that give raises as well as added seniority at a job - more difficult to fire without drastic measures or "good reason" or a lawsuit. Gotta have that third boat and your favorite 18 holes at the country club or else you might "wreck the company" because you don't have stress relief. Gotta keep the dogs at Bay Street. Vac insulation is expensive and prone to rupture - typically used in cryo only for that reason.
Lastly, the R-60 panels are not the top of the line models, the R-factor can get much higher than that, but the problem still remains that once they rupture, the R-factor literally goes down to 2, or 4. that is a serious and massive problem and the panels are expensive for a reason. But you're right, with current technology those reasons are deteriorating. I think the biggest problem is worrying about an excess of prosperity now, while damaging our future in the process. Prices go through the floor and suddenly you have a population epidemic on your hands. So all the real good ideas get buried anyway. The ones that know what can be done are quieted and the ones that don't know, don't know any better, while the rich stay rich with their yachts and large land, and their choice of any 16 yr old they fancy if the wife gets out of line (and even if she doesn't!) And don't worry about the lawsuits, that's what lawyers are for, and PR guys.
Hi Jacob Induction does not need special expensive pots $20 less metal cookware works on induction. They are 84 percent efficient compared to traditional flattop stove and coil or gas. They also cook more evenly without losing energy as the other aforementioned do. Gas requires constant venting and having pipes run through a house.
Hello a a. I never said iron pots are "special" exactly in the sense of expensive. Tell a 70 yr old to lift an iron skillet and try to explain to her why her aluminum or flimsy steel pot/teflon won't work. I'm quite aware of the benefits of having induction, and I'm fairly aware of the drawbacks as well. Microwaves are also quite a great invention! All the same I think you put a spell on me, or something like that. No need to take offense, I'm just a shoddy mental-ist lately. Also, the BC thing is never going to happen the way you want it to. Other plans are in the mix, don't worry. Water is going to be a problem with global warming and it's not going to be the lack of it.
Spring and fall are times when it is still cold but not necessarily cold enough for putting on a fire. This may not be an issue with those on natural gas or propane, but nevertheless we all know that it is at least half if not 1/3 as expensive to put on a heat pump than it is for resistive heating/cooling. Not everyone can afford geothermal heat pumps and the construction costs are high. This mandate would ease the transition while not adding much more than around $5 total cost per machine, as long as government ensures that this added feature, which is already in some high end models, gets given to lower class citizens. This could work for both whole-house warming or also in portable models. Many cheap heat pumps have a simple system wherein temperature differential kicks in, then the system shuts down, and when it starts up again, it works in reverse.
Excellent idea! As you have correctly noted, when implemented at scale the costs will be minimal.
It's not just "at scale"... It's literally adding a 5 cent setting into current manufactured goods. It's an area that has already been exploited by taking literally hundreds out of the pockets of Canadians more than needs to be taken out, for the sake of "advanced features" which really can be easily implemented by anyone with half a brain and a manufacturing parts online catalogue. Most people just don't know these sites exist or where to look for it. It's just manufacturers being greedy so they can keep their employers employed and their CEO's in trips to Aspen.
We all know that in order to increase prosperity that people are increasingly inefficient. Taking a page from the former Canadian resident Elon Musk, why not foster someone.... To create an end-to-end production chain for solar panels? Some of the biggest hurtles are the learning curve, but with increasing automation, great advancements in technology, there is literally no reason not to quantify as I'm sure you are aware, every step of a production chain. If Elon's doing it why don't we? Specifically thin-film makes more sense as they can be adhered to the sides of buildings with minimal added weight, surely less than the stonework facade currently on commercial buildings facing Ontario and the Saint Lawrence. Eliminating the boy's club on monopolistic prices as has been standard practice (conventional poly silicon from China hit 33 cents a watt FOB and lower, why is it still a dollar a watt in Canada? Taxes and duties) and for good reasons. We definitely don't want to overpopulate our world, giving up further control of our natural resources to unscrupulous and abusive competitive corporations in opposition to the Crown. Mainly because we need freedom. So take the information you've learned.... And do it already.
The forging industry can be quite lucrative. Nevertheless, technological advancements are there to retrofit these facilities. The biggest issue is that they aren't retrofitted and fall into disrepair. This has left the way open for countries like China to take much of our resources away from our soil, and melt them down and repackage them while still utilizing the advancements of cheap labour and expendable people. Simply put, the reason our economy is a banana economy is because all of our copper goes overseas or to the USA, instead of creating value-added products at home, and if they are made at home, the cost is simply prohibitive. This is a catastrophe and I'd address it myself but I can't. Relying on foreign entities leaves our economy fragile, and anything that can be exported that is value-added will surely help in the long run, both for the bottom lines of everyone but also for security of the nation, even though "value added" these days is not nearly as lucrative as it once was. Some forges/smelters still are not well-insulated, do not have more advanced features like zinc-coating, or utilizing many cost-saving features (some estimates said costs could be reduced by 40% simply by utilizing recyclables as they are cleaner input feedstock, nevermind green initiatives which have already been proven to work).Why am I paying 50 cents for a copper piece that was made in china from Canadian sources? Am I, and the rest of Canadians too stupid to be able to keep up in this field of optimization against foreign companies? No. The money is there, the only worry is the end-game scrupules of labour laws, but that's assuming that the future isn't AI controlled manufacturing. I swear I cry for this country, and am quite angry for it. My grandfather worked in precious metals, took a horse tablet salt pill every day. The pay was good enough and maybe that sort of behavior was part of what precipitated the demise of smelters, while the owners invested in other places and chose to work in regions with looser restrictions. Not that I'm against taking foreign energy in exchange for promissory notes of scraps of plastic, as long as that plastic note isn't used against the best interest of Canada. If you'd like a paper that explains these advancements that have typically not been utilized in north america I can provide you with a link at a later date. But we all know the dangers of paper.
The inherently greater efficiency and controllability of electrical systems (including the use of electric motors for transportation and heat pumps for heating and cooling buildings), when coupled with storage through the smart grid and the internet of things, can increase our aggregate energy and economic efficiency by an order of magnitude, while massively reducing GHG emissions. Canada has an opportunity to lead in the development of the supply chains for these technologies, and in their adoption, and thereby to create new employment opportunities in export industries which will survive the sunset of the fossil fuel era. We need to build a roadmap based on the insights of such leading thinkers and researchers as Jeremy Rifkin of the Wharton School (who will be speaking at the Generation Energy Forum), Ramez Naam of Singularity University (who will be speaking at the inaugural Singularity University Canada Summit in Toronto on October 12, 2017), Tony Seba, Professor of Innovation at Stanford University, and Michael Liebreich of Bloomberg New Energy. A bright, electrically-powered future is coming. Canadians should lead the transition, and enjoy the prosperity which will come to those who lead. 
Many innovations are already available, they're just not seen as necessary. How many have a hot water timer in their homes, raise their hand? The biggest concern is one of what happens when a good EMP hits, or an impressive CME? This is one reason why I believe we must protect our oil. There must be backups. But electrifying everything will be costly, and presently the tech to electrify everything isn't as mature as it could be. Currently they're working at 6nm for their lithography of electrical components, but that's not what's yet available. Most tech in use is still very old because it's cheap and the factories can pump them out without retrofit. Besides.. Who cares about 3 watts of power per device anyway? Except they add up to a lot. We are on the cusp of new innovation that will drastically cut power use. Forging into the fray too early can put us at a disadvantage and companies are making headway in this automation field (but you're right, they are making a killing
Agree Richard - Seems like an investment no brainer. I makes me really sad to see how backwards Canada is with some of its investments (CANMET for example.) Globally we're on the cusp of so many new technologies EV transportation of all types, reliable Batteries, Storage, tidal, wind etc.  Why can't we get more made-in-Canada-for-Canada technologies developed, why do we have to wait until China, US or EU develops tech and we have to then import it. We have the brains, the copper, rare earths, spodumene etc -where's our large scale business and government leadership? (For example -check out NorthVolt start up - northern Batteries for EVs, Trucks, Wind and Solar Ballast, Off Grid, smart grid. Why couldn't Canada have similar vision & investment?)
There are products not available in Canada or are excessively cost prohibitive. There are toilets that only use 1 gallon of water and are primarily used in apartment buildings but conventional stores rarely stock them. Hinchcliffe and Hennessy, a Trenton Ontario based company, a Canadian company, produces these toilets, yet American Standard, Kohler, etc are still frequently marketed, and while the costs are lower, the overall costs are much, much higher in terms of water usage. How does this apply? Well, cleaning water costs money, and the chemicals required cost electricity (usually) to produce. Anything reducing the need for sodium-fluoride and chlorine to be added to the supply will not save on infrastructure costs, but will save on everyday running costs. How about mandating that water collection is not illegal? You can say it's for a watershed protection, but in my opinion, as long as Nestle isn't sucking the ground dry, I don't see why private citizens must put up with being told they can't collect garden water. Additionally, this will likely modestly reduce the strain on the storm drain infrastructure (which nobody has the money to upgrade yet). Some faucets only use 0.25LPM and are quite effective especially in conjunction with point of use hot water heating, but they are not available in Canada, at least I haven't seen it. Perhaps it is due to the idea that these extremely low flow options are less hygenic, in which case that too can be fixed with adequate research and awareness campaigns. Even for mobile homes, as long as they are connected to adequate pressure, can save a lot for those that have little. If the private sector refuses to streamline production chains and offer these products then it is the goal of government to mandate that these products are available and/or offer assistance to the companies doing the innovating so as to ramp up production and protect natural resources. As it is, the USA is undergoing crop failures due to lack of water. If we don't want to be like them, it needs to start at home, and of course in conjunction with this as has already been demonstrated in the news, infrastructure is needed in the case of flooding. On the other hand, conservation may reduce the stress of environments where there are wildfires, even though I have seen some trucks purposely dump water over roads to keep dust down or encourage evaporation (in Prince George, BC) while the rivers were already running dry and the fountain drinks tasted like dirt. Point is, you're really going to need adequate desalination and/or follow India's lead in increasing reservoir capacity to deal with storm surges (which is already, as far as I can recall, "not in the budget" for a good ten years, at least for Toronto... Why build more transportation infrastructure again?) Heating and solar panels (solar heating) are not optimized for installations. The costs of installation in North America as far as recent figures have shown, has shown that "bloat" has effectively doubled the price of installations in comparison to Germany. Really, the is likely due to a lack of discipline and no hard-and-fast rules for rapid rollout of panels, as panels can be of differing sizes and the housing of such varies and the frames must be welded. This lack of standardization and good installation practices has caused headaches to consumers and has scared some away from installing all manner of panels, both poly and evacuated tubing. I suggest running advertisements, not about freedom and children running, but aspiring to be the best you can be, to perfect your trade, to aspire to a higher standard in work, and in play. But then again I don't watch TV so you may have already done that. Still, England has far surpassed Canada for solar heating installations and they have a worse climate than us, and the same population as us approximately, yet lesser tangible resources. How did this happen?
I work with nanotechnology (small micro electronic devices) that can be used to generate energy from typically usable sources. Although, solar or wind energy can be harvested by using existing technologies, there is apparently large amounts of wasted wind and solar energy in cities , mostly because conventional wind turbine generators and large scale solar arrays can only be installed in remote areas due to large size/infrastructure. If a triboelectric generator (TENG) is used with a solar cell (SC), it can be installed easily on roofs of urban structures. Triboelectric nanogenerators use a combination of the triboelectric effect and electrostatic induction to generate small amounts of electrical power from mechanical motion such as rotation, sliding, or vibration. In experiment, the current output was produced by a human simply stepping on a the nanogenerator powered 600 bulbs.
You must mean blue or red LED's of the smallest MM and highest efficiency. I've seen this tech in action. Raindrops falling from a few feet onto similar devices can power a single LED. Thank you for that wonderful primer. It surely explains a lot as to recent events. You could power implants with road traffic, which could be both a good thing, and a very bad thing. That reminds me - Mineshaft elevators can recoup some power simply by putting someone inside and descending/ascending (depending on the counterweight) if it's hooked up to a selective regenerative braking apparatus.
Engage Oil & Gas professionals to educate Canadians sidetracked by special interest groups. Certain Canadian governments atall levels and Canadian citizens have been hijacked byspecial interest groups generated from U.S. organizations such as Tides and the Rockefeller groups to name but a few under the notion their agenda is a green environment. Their definition of a "green environment" is poised to eliminate the Canadian Oil & Gas industry from getting their resources to tidewater - as stated in their "charity" agendas. Their intended result isU.S. energy independence OF North American Oil & Gas assets. The mandates of these organizations is to land-lock Canadian Oil & Gas development to ensure Canadians do not receive fair market value for our resources. Look it up! This is intolerable, particularly since the Canadian government subsidizes these "charities". Disgraceful is only a start!
I completely agree. Let's see if this website decides to remove this post, as it most likely does not fit their "agenda".
I agree as well. The conversation is too political, emotional, and completely unbalanced. As we begin our exit from the use of fossil fuels we must do do so without destroying our economy. Let's make sure the other sources of energy are up-and-running before dropping the most energy efficient and powerful hydrocarbon molecules. It should be more important to use this miracle source even more efficiently than flooding vast areas of land for hydro-electric dams, solar panels, and wind farms. I want a clean environment and I think the way to do it is to reduce our need for so much energy. If we drop oil too soon the effects would be devastating for Canada, especially if other countries are not doing the same.
I agree. There is so much lack of knowledge about the fossil fuel industry in our society, and unfortunately the gap seems to be filled with a pretty one-sided dramatic viewpoint from the likes of Greenpeace and other lobbyist groups. For many years, the oil industry enjoyed being anonymous, following regulations, and providing the country with energy. Society is still intricately dependent on fossil fuels, but it now gets a bad name. Education and communication can help.
The government using the Man Made global warming scenario is enabling special interest groups to push agendas that are not practical and or not supported, proven by the failures of wind and solar trials in other countries.
Many in public media are not necessarily interested in a legitimate debate, sitting down and listening to all groups, and finding an appropriate solution. In a recent article by Macleans, it was stated that the oil industry destroyed democracy in Canada, that the Canadian government silenced the hard working decent scientists who are trying to do something good wtih their lives (the suggestion being those who work in oil love all things evil and indecent). Climate change skeptics are called denier's (an attempt to associate with holocaust deniers). The Macleans article also claims that the royalty system (particularly Alberta) is for the benefit of the oil and gas company --- I am sure if you researched where royalty money goes, you would find transfer payments to other provinces, money spent on healthcare, schools, and so on. Yes, include E&P should be included, not ridiculed 24/7 
Instead of a pipeline to Eastern Canada to supply Canadians with oil extracted by business and people who pay taxes in CANADA the government has decided that foreign oil is better for us. (they have unilaterally forced the issue by deciding to include upstream and downstream emissions as a deciding factor in whether pipelines are built which means for Alberta, no new pipelines will ever be approved) Imported oil is not bought on its merits thus we get oil from awful places such as Saudi Arabia and other terrorist supporting nations. 
It is totally insane that US funding is directed at killing a Canadian resource and national economy! They complain about Russia interfering in their elections. But they are doing the same to our business model in Canada.
We have a better way to do SAGD but no one is listening. We can save the oil sands, pipe lines and stop investing in other country's bottom line.
Simply Chemical Engineering, not rocket science. The technology has been available since the early 1900's.
Are the COP 21 goals a real target, or are they merely aspirational and unattainable when considering the real timeframe of OECD climate change models. I feel we have to take a hard look at the COP 21 Canada targets and recognize the major paradigm shift our society would have to undergo in order to meet them by 2050. Otherwise our policies, through being unstated in a number of ways, set up a polarization between groups of individuals thinking "faster" means ignore the targets, while "slower" means change at all costs, neither of which is realistic. I would like to encourage government to consider this to ensure our feet are on the ground with respect to setting climate policy and regulations. We must recognize any policies weigh economic and GDP wealth (our current standard of living) against that of the next generation. If we are essentially putting funds in the climate bank for future Canadians, let's ensure the spending is smart, and guaranteed results will come. Carbon leakage, an unlevel playing field, and risk of inaccurate models are some factors that weigh againstthe argument of going all in on the climate change effort, and sacrificing huge portions of Canada's current well-being.
Canada should be supporting the construction of carbon capture pipelines in which carbon dioxide from various facilities is piped to depleting fields and pumped into conventional wells to produce additional oil
Carbon capture, whether from Oil & Gas Facilities or other industries, can actually be beneficial to the environment. Since the late 70's, research has been into co-generation projects where CO2 is captured and used in EOR (as mentioned by Dave above), or sold/marked for agricultural needs. Studies have shown CO2 sequestration can lead better crops and/or vegetation as CO2 is a compound commonly absorbed by plants (a study published by US journal Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences recently showed that plants need more CO2 than thought). CO2 is also a precusor in a number of chemical products, and used in many industries including medical applications: perhaps, an economic model could be setup to sell CO2 capatured in oil/gas operations to other organizations. If an E&P makes this effort, maybe tax incentives could be given -- or other approach
Additionally to Colin Jordan. CO2 sequestration is likely better captured in strategic areas which I will not mention. Current CO2 sequestration is still much more expensive than conventional oil, gas, propane, etc (usually propane) in producing CO2 for things like greenhouses. This increases overall costs. Interestingly, once the CO2 concentrations hit a tipping point (PPM above x, which is plant and wavelength/nutrient/climate dependent, CO2 actually becomes toxic to plants and actually inhibits yields. The best specialized CO2 capturing plants capture at a rate of, if memory serves, around $100-200/ton, and yes I have suggested at different times that hybridizing our gas plants would increase efficiency but it is inherently laden with problems, some of which I believe.... Norway? Finland? Denmark? One of them anyway, has worked out, but it isn't perfect and they know it. Sulfur compounds and other contaminants rust the pipes. Ah yes now I remember. They try to capture it by..
By creating carbonic acid. Pipelining it isn't a bad idea but the most conventional way of transporting CO2 is by truck. Try to spreadsheet trucking it by conventional gasoline combustion and it will probably prove prohibitive or deeply cut into profits. The biggest problem is that CO2 can turn acidic and eat away at most conventional pipes and even specialized pipes, which increases costs immensely as just one imperfection can mean total system failure and possible contamination of the feed pipe... Although it's not as bad as a hyperloop failure. Still, the costs would still be enormous to go any considerable length of pipe. Additionally the pressure required to produce additional oil is considerable, and that must be taken into account, since your system is based off of the idea of consistent pressure deep within the earth to do your work for you, but the Bars to create that are more than deep core would be for any considerable payback, plus you'd be fighting against Xe, etc.
When the Saskatchewan governmentbuilt the Boundary Dam it spent a lot extra money to capture the Carbon which it then sells to oil & gas companies in the Weyburn area. HoweverTrudeau fails to recognize this and still wants to punish them with the full carbon tax. There is no incentive for this from the Liberals. In 1999 another project in north East BC was proposed to capture the carbon in the Horn River Basin and ship it to the Zama oil field to be injected to enhance oil recovery. That project was killed because the BC government then wanted royalties on the CO2. This is not really about CO2 it is about taxes and money for the governments.
Lets sto the stupidity and get things going again. Carbon taxes dont help reduce carbon emissions they just reduce the number of people working and why? Even if Canada went to zero emissions what would it do for the global emissions, almost nothing. I sure wish I had a Premier like Saskatchewan and Manitoba have to fight the stupidity.
1. Carbon taxes do work but no one likes them because we are used to not paying for CO2 pollution 2. Brad Wall has facilitated the investment of > 1.5 billion of tax payers money into trying to make clean coal energy. Ask what the same investment into direct power generation from southern Saskatchewan's solar and wind resource? They actually have one of the highest green energy potential regions in Canada as well Hydrogen storage. All of the surplus could be exported to our southern neighbour. 3. Having Canada achieve zero emission's would make a huge impact on the over all global emissions as it is likely to provide an example of what is feasible for others with a little effort, coordination and political will. Doing a status quo is not an option. We as westerners created the problem so we at least can lead by example. 4. Stop the stupidity yes, get things going yes.
Lets be truthful, governments do not really care about climate change. Once they got people scared about it they come up with the magical solution TAXES. That alone should raise suspicion with thinking people. It is all about the money aka. Taxes to fund the governments social engineering experiments
A law must be passed to ban all foreign funding to environmental & anti oil groups along with transparency list of all donors. Follow the money to see who and which governments are funding the killing of the Canadian oil/gas industry. I bet that would be shocking.
Clean alternative energy sources (wind, solar, wave, hydro) will take decades to develop. In the interim, we should optimize Canada's ability to produce, transfer, refine and export Canadian bitumen resources. The revenue generated from the development of Canada's natural resources can then be targeted at clean energy research, development and commercialization. Even if the technology was available today to operate vehicles powered by H2O, it will still take us decades of coordinated effort to transition to the new technology. So lets get alignment in Canada between different levels of government, industry and community and properly exploit the natural resources we are blessed with. Then let's ensure we leverage the revenue to fund R&D into the new and clean alternatives we all wish to see. To accomplish this alignment, create a new ministry in the Federal Government: Ministry of New Energy, empower this ministry with regulatory jurisdiction to approve resource development, transfer, refining and export - keep all elements of resource exploitation & new energy research within this new ministry. It is time for Canadians to realize no other country in the world would pass up the opportunity to develop the energy resource we have dominion over.
Rather than shut down good coal mining operations we should ship coal to countries that use bad coal to generate power until they can catch up. This is a better strategy rather than saying all coal is not environmentally friendly. Use our good resources to help others carbon foot print.
Solar and wind have already over taken energy productioncost per KWH anddefinitely for capital cost.
Canada has abundant energy resources, but to essentially shut down the oil and gas sectors while importing oil from across the Atlantic makes no sense. Also, the same attutudes are preventing the export of these fuel resources to other countries; for example, to support India in her drive to lift her citizens from enery poverty is something in which Canada could participate. In effect we are subsidizing countries who have an agenda to spread Sharia Law throughout the World; this is something I do not wish to leave to my grandchildren.
Yes, common sense the one thing the environmentalists and various other special interests don't want our government to do, so far they have obliged by increasing red tape and delaying to the point that it makes projects un-economic. Not because the price of oil either, because they are being regulated to death.
It actually does make sense, I'm sorry. By importing energy we're taking from another country and preserving our own resources. It's not pretty but it's the truth. We are giving other countries useless plastic that burns for real resources. They have digits on a screen saying how much we owe. Take away their energy (which the coke can be enriched with nuclear) and when we refuse to pay, they cant fight back. If push comes to shove the world gets hacked and we revise how much we owe. Remember blaster?
No one is sayingjust down the oil and gas sector, we are in transition that has to bemade to clean energy production and harvesting. Oil and gas are too valuable to just burn for direct energy production. Harvesting Hydrogen, focusing on CH4 andrefining products for plastics, lubricants etc in a safe sustainable way is what is needed.
The energy east pipeline should be top priority in this country to unite Canadians and to keep jobs in Canada.
I think most experts in energy production agree that more long term green economy jobs will be created producing the same energy that energy east could ever deliver, that is what benefits and unites Canadians. Obsolete fossil fuel infrastructure investmentis not what is needed at this critical time. 
If fossil fuels are obsolete are you living that life and using absolutely nothing derived from fossil fuels. examples would be transportation, heating your home, having electricity from the grid, buying food from a grocery store, using medicine, wearing clothes you did not make, no electronics etc. etc. If the answer is no then you are living as a hypocrite. "Most" energy experts do not agree with your statement above.
We cannot just dump the petroleum industry. It will need to be phased out over many years. We will need to have alternative fuel sources competing economically with the petroleum industry before we try to phase it out. The government would do well to encourage businesses to design/create more economical versions of alternative resources.  Until the time the Alternatives are economically viable for even the poorest Canadians, penalizing the petroleum industry & its users will only further devastate lower socioeconomic groups of people. If we save the environment at the expense of people, there won't be many of us around to enjoy it.
It's already viable to phase out. Someone simply has to pull the trigger and nobody wants to pull that trigger because have you seen the ignorant people around? It's depressing, and the thought of prosperity causing more mindless drones copulating, being loud, and being as one book said "hot, flat, and crowded" is not my ideal future. Is it yours? Let me and others get up in your personal space on a consistent basis and see how much you enjoy it. Actually... Go to India. And China. And Japan. Go to a hotel. Grab a can of beer there. Then ask yourself how much empathy you have for other families having 4 kids. We're approaching 10 billion with a total estimated capacity of 14 billion. Not everyone is the Flanders neighbor but rather the neighbor from hell. Now imagine a world where death is cured and people don't have the forethought to not have a child. It will be anarchy. Let's be honest, "Many of us" will never be able to enjoy it. Alberta isn't poor, just stubborn. Ask why.
It is able to be dumped. The tech is there. The problem is what to do with all the prosperity afterward. "Hot flat and crowded" is our future. Go to India, China, Japan. Have a beer, go rent a hotel room and ask yourself if you believe "prosperity" doesn't have its price. Ask yourself if you want that future and if you want to give money to families that have 4 kids. We're approaching 10 billion with an estimated max of 14 billion. If you can imagine your personal space never respected, that's the future we're headed for if we're not careful. Alberta is stubborn and not poor for a reason. Ask why. There will never be "many of us around to enjoy it", and as population intelligence rises, so does the need for solitude. I'm not even rich, in fact I'm far below LICO. I know what the future holds. Adapt or die. If we ever have to escape this planet, the less packing the better. No offense to anyone, but some have no control.
Total babble
The Federal Government has to make it easier for pipeline companies to submit proposals and approve them. Thenatives will always approve them as long as they receive monies to their benefit. We need pipelines from coast to coast. These scare tactics from native groups and environmentalist are just that scare tactics without foundation.
Make it easier and make the timeline for review shorter. The length of time through the process kills the project due to time value of money. Money will always and easily move to regimes where the payback is quicker. It is not enough to have a process, the process must be timely and predictable. Definitely not the case in Canada at the moment. Pipeline delays are like cancer patient delays - they can kill.
What a stupid program
Reduce regulatory red tape and shorten the timelines to get these pipelines built to get our oil and gas to tidewater. Stop buying oil from dictatorships etc as well, we have LOTS of oil in Alberta and Saskatchewan and it's ethical unlike the stuff that comes in on tankers EVERY single day to Eastern Canada. It benefits theENTIRE country, not just special interests and other much smaller groups.
It is wrong when our Canadian businesses have far more regulations and red tape to adhere to than foreign entities. We need to support Canadian oil and gas. I would like to see a referendum of this. Enough of the vocal activists and Quebec controlling Canada's future.
More pipelines!
So what your saying is it is the Federal Governments role to enhance fossil fuel infrastructure development so we can get more immediate economic benefit,and itsa good idea not to start decoupling our economy from the fossil fuel industry?The cost of this strategyis already taking its toll in many adverse ways. More pipelines yes, carrying Hydrogen!
I totally agree with more pipelines, but they must be kept safe and heavily monitored in reasonable ways. Standards must be adhered to stringently. If there are violations or accidents - companies must be held accountable and compensations be guaranteed to peoples and communities. Now that being said.... People must be held responsible for respecting these pipelines - realizing that they exist for the common good of everyone of us people and our country. Please cut out the "personal-rights" of the "hot-headed" individuals that are clambering for attention... please get a life or... perhaps get a job with an oil company if you would qualify... However - consider...Canada is a big country that has cold winters - electric cars simply won't cut it here...
Canada has an abundance of natural resources which must be utilized by industry to provide jobs to Canadians and sustain a strong middle class. Canada must be energy independent to maintain our sovereign country and provide the best chance for our children to grow and prosper. The government needs to stop taxing energy and let a free market economy develop that follows the laws, and is morally responsible. All government officials, elected or not, must be held accountable for their decisions and the effect those decisions have on Canada as a whole.
Agreed
If they(Feds, Que, BC) won't play nice and allow pipelines east or west and to reach tidewater so we are not stuck to our only customer to the south, promote the Railroad north. It's time!! http://smokyriverexpress.com/the-g7g-proposal/
Agreed
It is obvious our world will have to use fossil energy for a while before we can replace it when possible with alternative energies. It is not a black or white situation. We need to act on 2 levels: decrease our consumption and in the same time preserve and manage our energy ressources as a nation. I will insist on the second level : Because our ressources are not limitless, Because they give us our jobs and later our retirement . And plus they come with an ethical and environmental weight we all appreciate in Canada. Why all provinces of Canada are not fighting for the same cause? Especially when they get money from these ressources? And who are the winners: USA getting cheap energy -oil and water , Middle east selling his oil. Canada must be strong and firm on his energy and natural ressources policy. 
Canada will to have to retrain thousands of workers to be able to do different jobs all the while building infrastructure for this green energy system. This will take billions. Where will this money come from? Higher taxes, high energy costs. None of these things will help the economy. Green infrastructure only replaces an existing industry at best. Not growing it. Not only does oil and gas creates economic growth for export it also supplies money for all the fancy green infrastructure. Build.
We need to use our natural resources while using technology to find better ways to help our environment!
Even when a company follows the process, meets all environmental requirements and has federal/provincial approval the process does not allow the project to proceed. It comes down to individuals or interest groups saying I don't care what is approved I won't allow it. They then use the court systems unfairly to delay projects until the company no longer can proceed. The process needs to be that there is some fair guarantee to a company that if they invest millions of dollars that the project will occur. At present it feels like a mayor, region, first nations, special interest environmentalist have all the advantages. The end result company's are pulling out of Canada and going to other regions where they have more certainty. I feel I am in a Feudal system where our country has broken down andassuch we are giving other countries billions in investments and opportunities. To fixenforce the decision that it is a federal decision otherwiseagain why would a company want to invest in Canada. 
Well said!
We're buying foreign oil and supporting those countries - how does that make sense?
Why we are buying foreign oil is a mystery to me!
Well said!
As everyone knows alternative energy is not going to be available in the quantities neeeded for a good number of years. We must, at the very least, make ourselves energy efficient within our own boundaries. To do this I propose we find the Right Price for our crude and bitumen through talks and negotiation with the oil suppliers and pay that amount internally. Forget the world price. If the magic number is 60 dollars per barrel that is what is paid. In this way we create a stable environment for oil producers and to the end user as well. We ship via pipeline and or rail to the the east and west and look after our own needs first. Any surplus can then be sold on the world market. If the world price goes above the hypothetical $60/barrel price we arent obligated to pay more. The oil companies are locked in at that price but any surplus can be sold outside our borders at world pricing. Figuring into the price would be research and development to make the product cleaner and also for developement of other sources of cleaner energy. The governments could back off on some of their taxes at the pump to make it more affordable with the increase from the $50/barrel at todays world price and the extra we would have to pay to keep big oil happy and productive. This scenario would alleviate the boom and bust associated with the industry, a more stable climate for jobs, which would in turn bring a more even flow of taxes into the provincial and federal coffers.
Somewhat agree
I think this rush to go electric is a terrible idea.going to tax our electrical system and power bills will go way up.Estimated England needs 50% more electricity to supply demands.Never mind the the minerals required for these batteries.Only sell with subsidies so the poor are paying for the rich to have subsidized vehicles because they are too expensive.The global trends indicate that humans are the cause of global warming,something I think is ludicrous.You never hear of anyone against climate change,almost as if there are no skeptics.The same tactic the Nazis used in their time-control the media and you can brainwash people into believing anything.The majority of IPCC members have no training or schooling in climate studies and they are the absolute 'authority' on climate change.
Somewhat agree
I only criticized electrical vehicles but never gave an alternative-go to steam powered or water powered,maybe nitrogen or hydrogen.Steam would be best because it uses very little oil for lubrication.Unless we can develop batteries that don't require cobalt or lithium and that won't pollute the environment when they are spent.
Agree
The government is actively exploiting people's ignorance of the truth with regards to global warming. It's environmental hysteria to justify a tax grab. What they should focus on, is recognition of companies with proven and quantifiable investments that support all aspects of environmental sustainability.
 Government are trying to tax the air. Good companies should in fact be encouraged to develop better energy efficiencies but by reducing red tape not incentives from tax payers 
The carbon tax is nothing more than a tax grab. The current system in Canada is not working !! Ontario and Quebec will always control the rest of the country which is totally wrong, we need an electoral College system like the one in the US to make all Provinces equal in voting power,but we all know that will never happen so I will be voting for the west to separate from Canada as this is the only way that the west will ever get a fair deal. The liberal party of Canada including Justin Trudeau is the worst thing to ever happen to Canada. Until the above electoral college is instituted we in the west will always get screwed. So separation is the only thing to vote for....
THe carbon tax is a tax grab perpetrated by pathetic people. Let industry decide about green. Also Trudeau's supposed to be helping the middle class. The country's economy is in pathetic shape. 
It's absurd that Canada imports foreign oil when we sit on the 3rd highest oil reserves on Earth. Can someone name another country on Earth that develops its natural resources in a more responsible manner than Canada and is a free society? The answer is there isn't one and yet the Eastern provinces import oil from despotic regimes with little regard for the environment. It's a bloody disgrace!
Totally agree!
I agree!
The various Canadian governments federal, provincial and municipal has to stop holding hostage the Companies trying to get our resources to market. We need to stop our dependence on foreign oil, which is the lining the pockets of many countries with horrible human rights records, and support our own countries resource use, creating jobs, and wealth for our country. The federal government needs to stop the transfer payments to Quebec and only then will they get on board with supporting the provinces that support them. It is past time for our federal government to step up and back pipeline development and get our resources to market. 
Totally agree. Need all levels of government to acquire a backbone on this subject. Why we purchase foreign oil is criminal.
A law must be passed to ban all foreign funding to environmental & anti oil groups along with transparency list of all donors. Follow the money to see who and which governments are funding the killing of the Canadian oil/gas industry. I bet that would be shocking.
    Ecologists believe beavers can make California wet againcottagelife.comHere is an idea to help prevent future fires and reforest burned out areas.http://cottagelife.com/news/ecologists-believe-beavers-can-make-california-wet-again/ This link shows a process that has been researched by scientists. This has also been successfully done in Canada, and back in the 1940s by the state of Idaho. They succeeded in saving state park acreages by relocating 75 beavers. Idahoalready built a carrier that floats gently to the ground and opens, after being dropped from an airplane. This process will work in Canada if done on a large scale, say 1000-2000 beavers to start with. These containers can be dropped by airplane and made out of biodegradable materials so they wouldn't need to be picked up.Within the past 10 years Canada tried this process, they were able to forest, what had previously been grasslands, within 5-7 years. If nothing is done, Canada will loose it's beautiful forests. I also came across an article that said the state of WA recently tried this with 300 beavers. The first winter after they did this 2016 - 2017, all of the water reservoirs in California were refilled. Since water rises straight up, this program would turn the Canada into a huge humidifier. This program should be started along the western coast of Canada and winds will carry the moisture east. All this humidity will have a cooling effect on the country, to offset Global Warming. If this is successful, Canada could become a leader by teaching other northern countries the best way.   
Dumbest idea I've heard in a long time. I can't believe what government spends my money on!
As an immigrant of 36 years to this beautiful country it baffles me that the government supports buying 700,000 barrels of oil from countries who have few environmental and safety regulations some of which also regularly commit serious human rights violations. The carbon footprint of those nations are huge compared to Canadas and the shipping from these foreign destinations make for an environmentally disastrous combination. My husband worked for two different oil and gas companies in the Middle East and witnessed conditions that would be cause for immediate shut down if it were in Canada. Why you would like to support this practice rather than using Canadian product that is produced with the highest environmental practices in the world makes absolutely no sense. Because a famous actor flies in with his private jet (some carbon footprint consciousness) and makes a statement that discounts a viable industry and heavily funded opponents raise their voices you dont look at ALL the facts seriously. Im a retired RN and I once had a client who grew up in Fort Mc Murray. She was 95 years old at the time when she told me how she and her siblings would swim in the river as a young child and come out covered in a black tarry substance. This was long before any industry had discovered the oil sands. It was right in the water. According to todays standards that would have been considered an environmental catastrophe, when in fact it was natures own way. You want transfer payments from Alberta but at the same time you want to shut down the obvious source of wealth for Alberta and the rest of Canada. Common sense has obviously departed from Ottawa.
This person's perspective is clear and I agree that it makes no sense to continue to import foreign oil from countries that do not have the same standards as Canada, when in fact our own oil is produced responsibly and ethically and can fill all of cannada's needs for the future.
I also have worked in the oil industry indifferent middle eastern countries. Most would indeed be shut down if in Canada for health, safety and environmental reasons. The environmental damage in these countries is horrific. People need to follow the money that is funneled into these environmental groups to kill the oil & gas industry. They will be shocked to find foreign oil producing governments and others with vested interests in killing the competition. Sadly most people are willing to look the other way and keep sending vast amounts of money to despot regimes to buy their oil rather than support Canada.
Common sense is not a strong point with the environmentalist mentality of the current Federal government! As for Quebec, they just like to complain in order to get more handouts of tax dollars.
Unfortunately we have a government that was elected because Trudeau has "nice hair"..and popularity, but not on facts nor knowhow.. sadly - there were no real persons to run against him, except for Mr. Harper.. now with that said..We do need our oil industry viable to maintain our way of life until a drastically new technology comes into reality...Solar and electric cars will NOT hold up to reasonable requirements in winter conditions. I'm sure our scientific stations located in the high arctic and antarctic are not very "green" when it comes down to even basic living.. be reasonable and consider where we live..this is Canada not a small country that you can cross in a day under warm mild conditions.. Especially considering the price of electricity is rising in an uncontrolled, nor reasonable way. Just how many times will you have to stop in volatile locations to recharge and the cost of doing it??? People ~ do think it through.. Responsible production must be our key concern.
We can meet Canada's climate goals, create jobs, and keep energy affordable by placing more wind[farms] all across Canada. This will meet Canada's climate goals by keeping the air cleaner, having economic growth and supporting future generations. Also, by placing more windmills it will create more jobs for manufacturers, construction [personnel], for operations and maintenance, as well as many other spin off jobs. It keeps energy affordable by people not having to use electricity and now they'll be using natural energy from the wind. There are pro's and con's to this, like days that it isn't overly windy, but in the long run it's a way bigger pro especially for the environment. 
Look at Ontario and their "affordable" energy after going heavy into renewables. Go live by a wind turbine and see how pleasant it is.
with Memorial University of Newfoundland, Vastly increase the public transportation system, especially in areas where it is weak or non-existent. This would decrease the number of vehicles on the road. [As well], subsidizing car pooling for students. If there was an incentive to get more people in less vehicles by aiding the costs of fuel, it would mean less vehicles on the road with only a single driver.
with Memorial University of Newfoundland, The Canadian Government should invest more into renewable energy (such as wind, wave, solar, for example) until they are efficient enough to build and use. When these energy sources are developed, then we can transition from fossil fuels, The government should also reduce barriers for the private sector, and provide subsidies and incentives such as tax breaks to businesses that invest in green energy.
with Memorial University of Newfoundland, Each home install solar panels or wind turbines. (My Dad uses solar panels and a wind turbine at our cabin, and it is a perfect alternative!). Try to use less transportation (gas/diesel engines) and use more battery powered cars. [Also] if people started just a small garden growing vegetables, it would cut down on extra transportation.
Encourage businesses to use solar power [for] some of their activities. This could be done by government subsidies to help the cost of such projects. This would also give people more jobs working in the field [of renewable energy].
Government subsidies = more taxes for everyone to pay to benefit businesses. Tax credits is the better way to go.
My generation energy idea, is for the government to create a fund to pay for solar panels to be installed to homes. This will help Canada meet their climate goals by switching to renewable energy instead of using, for example, fossil fuels to heat homes. This will create more jobs for technicians to install these panels.
Solar Panels are not capable of heating homes. If people want solar panels they should pay for them themselves.
Useour natural energy resources to help the world to reduce CO2 emissions. 1) Export LNG to India and China toencourage them to build less coal fired power plants and to convert existing coal fired plants to lower CO2 emitting LNG. 2) Use our own natural resourcesfor our own energy needs. This will reduce/eliminate imports from foreign sources. Less Oil Tankers on the high seas and in coastal waters will decrease environmental risk caused by spills.
1. Divert all fossil fuel subsidies to green energy production. 2. Invest (NRCAN) in retrofitting existing pipelines for Hydrogen + CH4 transport. 3. Increase footprint of Electric charging and Hydrogenrefueling stations 4. Use excess energy production for Hydrogen production (See Ragan Mine Que.energy site) 5. Convert Canada's Centennial flame to burn Hydrogen or at least a mix of H2 + Greener CH4 to signal we are transitioning to a new economy. For starters .... 
My idea would be to stop the production of gasoline cars and create all electric cars, and instead of having gas stations have a recharging station where people would have outlets to charge their cars. This would help the environment because it would create a lot less carbon dioxide emissions from fossil fuels.
If we actually did that we would crash the electrical grid as it is not designed for that type of load and thousands of new dams and power generation plants would have to be built across the countryto supply the amount of electricity required. The whole grid would have to be replaced as well.
Solar and electric cars will NOT hold up to reasonable requirements in winter conditions. I'm sure our scientific stations located in the high arctic and antarctic are not very "green" when it comes down to even basic living...... be reasonable and consider where we live....this is Canada not a small country that you can cross in a day under warm mild conditions...... Especially considering the price of electricity is rising in an uncontrolled, nor reasonable way. Just how many times will you have to stop in volatile locations to recharge and the cost of doing it??? People ~ do think it through......
with Memorial University of Newfoundland, Have the government switch out most of its vehicle fleet over to electric cars. This would reduce government emissions and cause more infrastructure to be made for electric cars, allowing for electric cars to be more practical for civilians. Also the government should provide benefits to people purchasing electric cars instead of a carbon tax on gasoline, because why would you tax people extra, for using the only system that's in place. Benefits should go to people who are using the currently "impractical' electric cars.
We can meet Canada's climate goals by creating [more] cars that run on solar power, this way we don't release as many fossil fuel [emissions] into the atmosphere and it creates a clean energy transportation system. This also will create jobs because we need people to manufacture these cars. This energy is affordable because this energy source is always available and it wont cost much once the cars are on the market.
This is Canada, the sun does not shine a lot in the winter months. Solar panels contain a lot of toxic materials which requiremining to acquire and refine the materials. Lots of emissionsinvolved in mining and refining.At present there is very very limited recycling facilities that can handle the toxic mix of materials in solar panels.
Solar and electric cars will NOT hold up to reasonable requirements in winter conditions. I'm sure our scientific stations located in the high arctic and antarctic are not very "green" when it comes down to even basic living...... be reasonable and consider where we live....this is Canada not a small country that you can cross in a day under warm mild conditions...... Especially considering the price of electricity is rising in an uncontrolled, nor reasonable way. Just how many times will you have to stop in volatile locations to recharge and the cost of doing it??? People ~ do think it through......
I'm here [In Newfoundland and Labrador] on an exchange from Sweden, and one of the first things that struck me when i arrived in Newfoundland and specifically Corner Brook (since I haven't visited any other city besides Deer lake), was the lack of trains and buses, how everyone seemed to own their own car and that fuel is rather cheap. I get that you need a car here because it's awfully hilly, and there are long distances, which is why I believe there is an existing need for more than two bus lines. An expansion of the public transportation is a rather easy step to get some cars off of the streets. I know changing peoples habits is hard but in order to do so, you need to give them the opportunity.
Canada is a large country. Public transportation only helps those in the cities. There are lots of rural people.I am married to a Sweden and have been in Sweden several times. Public transportation on a mass scale works better in small countries with concentrated populations.
The use of more solar and wind energy. There could be less use of fuels which could possibly help our climate and jobs can be related to improving solar and wind energy. Solar and wind could be cheaper in the long run as well.
As both Solar and Wind are interruptible supplies, Meaning theyare not capable of producing power 24 hours per day. Therefore youwould still need conventional power plantsto pick up the full base load when the wind is not blowing or the sun is not shining. The full cost of staffing and maintain these power plants would remain.
Nothing wrong with this idea as long as there is backup or storage for when the sun doesn't shine and the wind doesn't blow!
They just need to stop clearing bush to install solar farms and turbines. Instead of ruining the landscape with the monstrous towers that interrupt so many peoples lives, let landowners get off the grid and be self sufficient.
Create a small scale hydroelectric generator that could be installed in a small brook to provide green energy to a house. You could hire people to make and install them. This would create jobs, and cheaper, cleaner energy for people.
New government buildings should be at least LEED Silver, or better, [they should] meet the "Living Building Challenge". Not only do these buildings generate less ecological impact over the course of their lifetime, they incur less operational costs than the normal industry standard. These cost savings are largely due to the increased energy efficiency associated with these buildings. Over the course of their lifetime, they cost less to tax payers, improve workplace quality for public employees and decrease ecological impacts.
In this world of extreme competition the main advantage Canada has is our resources including oil and gas. For the country to prosper and create jobs for our young people Canada needs to use the resource advantage. Canada is doing a good job of developing environmentally sensitive technology in extracting the resources . A lot of people aren't aware of this or refuse to listen. Their mission is to show the world what it means to go green even if it destroys the economy.
Agree!
Try to make renewable energy more accessible and affordable (e.g. solar panels and wind turbines). Solar panels are a good alternative because they can provide a lot of energy. Wind turbines would be particularly useful along certain areas of Newfoundland and Labrador, where wind speeds are higher.
Build pipelines east and west as they are the safest and most efficient means of transporting oil and gas. Stop buying unethical oil or any oil from countries with poorer environmental standards than Canada. End the hypocrisy of allowing oil tankers from foreign countries or with foreign oil while banning tankers carrying Cdn oil/gas/crude! Use clean burning coal technology that currently exists and is in use to provide cheap electrical energy to Canadians across Canada! Transition to alternative forms of energy when they become economically viable and sound-NOT because someone in government is willing to pour billions of dollars down the drain to push an agenda before its time!
Totally agree!
YES!!! Climate change is a farce. Canada contributes a minute amount of pollution globally and the end goal is to decrease teh global temperature by 2/10s of a percentage? am I the only one who thinks it is absolutely ridiculous to think that we can control the temperature?
Wonder if Cori caught Bob McDonald's special on Solar Geoengineering, experiments to realize the deliberate and controlled cooling of the earth via the injection of particles in the atmosphere to reflect light.  http://www.cbc.ca/news/technology/bob-macdonald-blocking-sun-global-warming-1.4050149 This occurs naturally during volcanic eruptions. http://www.sciencetimes.com/articles/2601/20150113/study-shows-volcanoes-may-be-causing-global-cooling.htm 
Canada has most technologies in the wold and must make use of these technologies. For instance, Canada has 6288 wind turbines, 272 wind farms operating coast to coast and tidal power. However, they should make use of these technologies [more]. I think more tidal power should be built in Canada and get rid of the use of gas electricity. Tidal power will help save the climate, as well as create jobs and keep energy affordable. Canada should eliminate coal as a source of electricity and use the moons gravitational pull on earths tides to create electricity.
Is this a real University? You will not get "rid" of fossil fuel power plants with tidal power. It is not reliable enough or on a large enough scale to be a base load. You can have all the solar, wind and tidal you want but fossil fueled power plants will still be required for base load. These plants will have to fully staffed and maintained to be able to ramp up the base load as needed when the sun is not shining, the wind is not blowing and during low tidal differences.
Generating electricity by converting biogas from sewage treatment plant [will] dispose less organic waste to the environment. The annual amount of sewage is enough to create around 200 gigawatt hours of energy.
In larger urban areas this does make sense , however as with most newer ideas there will be a cost premium to it
why not build a pipeline to Churchill, Man?? I have done some reading?? yes the port is not in operation and I guess it is a bit low water...but there must be a way to make it work ...better than nothing ...I come from Manitoba...I'm sure they would welcome the pipeline with open arms ...stop messing with people that don't want to help Canada or Canadians
I agree. If Quebec is going to be a barrier, then go around them. We can still get the oil to the refineries in Atlantic Canada and enjoy the sight of Canadian oil tankers offloading on the east coast instead of foreign tankers filled with dirty oil. if would mean the sea shipping industry in Canada would now get a boost as well.
We have the cleanest oil in the world and our emissions are the lowest. I think the only reason we show emissions is from eastern Canada that uses dirty oil from Saudia arabia. That needs to stop immediately. We should not have to share any oil profits with provinces that do not use our oil. We need to have a pipe line that runs coast to coast and sell our clean oil to keep our country at the top. The non actions made by government in the last 18 months are going to sink our country down to a broke and needy nation and i wonder who will pay for it to survive then?
we need a national inquiry into the reasons behind the Canada East debacle. It was not the business case that failed, it was the political interference and governmental intransigence that killed it. There was huge support from outside NGO's like Tides, who influenced the outcome. Investigators need to follow the money. Where & who did it come from and where & who did it go to. No doubt in my mind that some were paid to kill the project.
Indeed follow the money of these groups and you will find foreign governments of oil producing countries that were scared of the competition. We need a law that requires all environmental groups to report on who their donors are and how much. A bunch of them would close up shop if that happened. We need the national inquiry to include the organizations who have worked so hard to kill Canada's energy industry as well. Foreign funds to any of these groups needs to be banned by law with penalties, same for foreign funds to groups that influence elections.
What the heck happened to the Energy East pipeline. Such a good idea to use our oil domestically and sell it to the world beyond the USA. We need to resurrect this pipeline! While wind and solar power is great oil is used in many many products and will be around for centuries to come. Don't hog tie our oil producers with limited pipelines to export. Pipelines have been proven to be very environmentally safe for decades. Get them built!!
Instead of importing oil, we need to start refining and using our own. That pipeline should've had support from all. The equalization payments to Quebec should stop as they were against it.
Energy East & West pipelines should be completed, Canada should withdraw from Paris Climate Agreement. The payment of 2.6 billion dollars should be stopped. The regions that resisting to pipelines should by penalized by reduction in government funding and subsidies. Canada should stop to rely on foreign oil.
Canada needs to better adapt a nationalist approach to energy and promote further, easier and more cost effective options for export like the "Energy East Pipeline"... The fact the politicians involved in frustrating the pipeline from happening only further provides my skepticism of our elected leaders and their ability to effectively do their job. The only thing I see happening lately is small business getting hammered by taxes and layers of government interference.
As a Consulting Engineer I am extremely disappointed that we cannot get major projects that make complete sense approved. I believe this is mostly because of political interference in the process. The current Govt criticized the PC's for problems in this regard only to replace them with far more interference of their own. We need to be cognizant of the environment in any project, but for example, failure of the Energy East Project (clearly because the proponent sees a mountain of interference in front of them with probable failure) will only mean foreign oil being imported into our waters that has been processed without regard for environment that we would expect. We constantly hear of only opposition, whereas I know from personal experience and large projects that I have worked on, that many FN's and other groups are often very supportive. When Oils demand reduces, as it eventually inevitably will, it should be the 'users' who drive this and not political interference.
Why do we import oil!!!USE OURS!!! BUILD PIPELINES AND REFINERIES!!!Canadians should be paying less than 50 cents/L. and we should be exporting as much as possible. This country is full of stupid people.
Well stated by all the above so far!
1. Pipelines are safe 2.No govt investmen 3. Global warming (man-made) still not proven -read last IPCC summary report - no global warming for several decades (except for last year- an exception) this DISPITE major increases in CO2 throughout this period i.e. link not proven. Also CO2 is less than 5% of all GHG's + in any case Canada is a net absorber of CO2 due to our extensive forest! Also there has been noticeable greening of equatorial forests - plants need/use CO2 - there is even scientists that advocate for a 1000 ppm CO2 atmospere. 4. There should be a SIGNIFICANTduty on imported oil as a) imported oil is not subject to carbon taxes, environmental restrictions, etc b) risk of tanker traffic mishaps (incl. whales) c) displaces Canadian jobs and industries (=taxes) d) comes from non-democratic countries etc. The only beneficiaries are P.Q. and to lesser extent Ontario.  
In 2016 eastern Canada imported 759,000 bbls of oil per day according to the national energy board. If one uses the average price in 2016 of US $43.33 (from US energy information)add in the average exchange rate of 1.325521 (from Canadian Forex) Canada paid $57.44 CDN per bbl of imported oil which equals $43,593,031 per day and $15,911,456,315 for the full year of 2016. That is $16 billion we sent to other countries to buy their oil and most of them have little to no environmental standards. I have worked in a couple of the middle eastern oil fields, it would shock most people. Canada has some of the best and toughest standards in the world. We have our own oil why do we buy foreign conflict oil and eastern Canada says that is fine? How come the imports are not subject to the same standards Canadian oil is.We need toconsider the upstream and downstream emissions of the production and ships of this foreign oil. We need that money to fund the transition to a cleaner future. That $16 billion a year cycling through the economy creates a massive amounts of jobs and taxes. Canada's official approach needs to change. We need require foreign oil to meet our domestic standards in everyway. Then we must maximize the revenues from our own natural resources to help pay for thedevelopment of new technologies to reduce our emission's.
Absolutely, foreign oil MUST meet the equivalent of Canadian oil in all regards, including the human factor. Otherwise, we should be consuming our own resources. That is the travesty of the cancellation of the Canada East pipeline. None of the oil currently being imported comes anywhere close to the standards of Canada in the way it was extracted. Canadians, and I mean all Canadians, must realize that what is good for the whole is also good for the few. Quebec has to get it's head out of the ground and get on board or risk being marginalized. Acting like a spoiled child is not helping our country.
Great article- also many of the countries we are importing this oil from are tyrannies- is Venezuela, Saudi Arabia. we are supporting the worst types of dictatorships.
Well said!
Equalizer could be to add a significant DUTY/EXCISE TAX to imported oil !!!
The progressives and eco-cultists can demonize and destroy our oil and gas industry because they are so much more righteous and morally superior to the average working stiff. Most rational Canadians should deem the government sponsored destruction of these industries, forfeiting over $60 BILLION (so far), and tens of thousands of well paying jobs to be despicable and down right treasonous!!
Bluntly put the federal governments own information supplies the answer, Canada has 900 million acres of trees, wetlands,farmlands and each acre of forest uses consumes 2.6 tones of carbon the total is far in excess of what we produce therefore Canada has a surplus of carbon credits and should use these credits for the development of our fossil fuels for the following
Continuing the products we use everyday that come from our oil indusrry such as ashphalt,fertilizer,plastics,carbon fibres,glue,and fuels to replace those fuels not as clean!
Bottling up Canada's natural resources instead of developing them, hurts all Canadians. Current Government policies seem bent on stifling Canada's energy development. No pipelines,(yet), less competitive with USA, little support for energy development; leading to less jobs and a lower standard of living for all Canadians. There seems to be a lack of balance between the Government's support for using our natural resources, versus the development and use of costly alternative energy sources. 
Totally agree.
Research, build, and instal tidal generators in coastal tide-waters
I think that it is insane that we would not use Canadian oil energy in eastern Canada as well as export it to other countries looking for energy that is safely transported, ethical and reliable. The government has put restrictions on energy east and yet no restrictions on the importation of oil. It is far better for the environment and the economy to use Canadian Oil.
Completely agree! Canada has the ability to safely extract oil and refine it here, why are we supporting OPEC?
Yes. It's really a no-brainer to anyone with an ounce of common sense.
Absolutely. It is disgusting that the mayor of Montreal objects to the Canada East Pipeline but lets raw sewage into the St Lawrence River. We need to bring Western crude oil to Eastern Canada and stop importing crude from Saudi Arabia and Venezuela.
Why import OPEC country oil when we have our own. Build Canada East pipeline
Decrease dependence on foreign oil
CANADA EAST PIPELINE NOW. IMPORTING FOREIGN CRUDE MAKES NO SENSE WHEN WE HAVE THE ENORMOUS RESERVES HERE.
A law must be passed to ban all foreign funding to environmental & anti oil groups along with transparency list of all donors. Follow the money to see who and which governments are funding the killing of the Canadian oil/gas industry. I bet that would be shocking.
currently we appear to have difficulty building pipelines to get our oil product to market, ie Energy East. May I suggest that we apply a 50-70% Customs Duty to crude oil imported into Canada, then a 20-30% Excise tax. With this kind of taxes it will not be beneficial for Quebec and Eastern Canada to import foreign crude into Canada. Suddenly there will be great clamouring for a pipeline with CDN oil to Eastern Canada. Next, nationalize all hydroelectric power to the Govt of Canada, taking away the incentive to export that energy to USA, thereby allowing Canada to use our hydro! next watch Quebec and Ontario scream that they are being robbed/raped by the federal Government. OMG it sounds like I have created a National Electrical Plan similar to the 1980s National Energy Plan!!!
I agree.
Seems pretty dumb to import oil from Saudi Arabia when we could be sending oil from Alberta to New Brunswick by pipeline
We have more than enough natural resources to be totally self sufficient . Oilsands NEED to be in full production ASAP , the RING OF FIRE in northern Ontario is floundering and needs to get on track and start progressing .We have to stop outside influence and opinions because they don,t take care of unemployed people . We need the jobs , we need the money being made in Canada and we need to spend our money in Canada .Government is WAAAYYY to corrupt with hidden agendas everywhere . THEY are the ones that keep this country from being great . All of these projects can be done safely and clean , but to many greedy F...s everywhere with their hands out asking " what,s in it for me ? " We desperately have to get our energy program running smoothly and to full capacity , cut off foriegn imports . If the tree huggers have their way , there will be a long lineup at your local unemployment office !!
A law must be passed to ban all foreign funding to environmental & anti oil groups along with transparency list of all donors. Follow the money to see who and which governments are funding the killing of the Canadian oil/gas industry. I bet that would be shocking.
Build a coast to coast pipeline to enable Canada to refine our own oil for Canadian use and to use this resource for export to the rest of the world so that we are not dependent on the U.S.then use these profits to become green and self sufficient
Self sufficiency of energy and independence from suppliers that maintain low standards requires a pipe line to deserve the domestic market and export our resources as well as refine in Canada rather than the US Recognition that natural resources particularly oil makes for a stronger currencies and an incentive to be more innovative to compete while reducing the cost of imports alternative sourceses of energy need to be developed but not at the expense of jobs in the energy sector export potential of resources. Oil will be here for a long time even though alternative energy sources will compete with fossil fuel over the next couple of decades
These Liberals and eco-zealots will have us freezing in the dark. Why shouldn't we be capitalizing on the world's third largest oil reserves? Pure idiocy!!
Canada EAST pipeline NOW.
A business decision solidified by the Federal governments over-reaching regulatory duties to facilitate a political agenda.
until renewable sources are commonly available along with competitively priced electric products (automobiles), we must use Canadian oil and gas, we must refine these Canadian commodities in Canadian facilities employing, you guessed it, Canadians and distribute it through Canadian pipelines made of Canadian steel. I have stated my opinion many times on Facebook and I want our PM Mr. J Trudeau to make this happen.
The NEB should be basing their decisions regarding pipeline projects on scientific standards that applies to all Canadian industries - will it apply to hydro dams? Or will they be grandfathered in? Alberta oil would replace oil imported from countries with terrible human rights records & without concerns over emissions, countries such as Nigeria and Venezuela. Do future emissions by Bombardier products count when provincial & federal money is given? Does Bombardier use "clean" oil produced under Canadian environmental standards or "dirty" oil from abroad? Justin Trudeau threatens a trade war with Donald Trump over Bombardier's future - where is the same action for the Alberta pipelines and oil industry?
Take excess carbon dioxide(GHG) and heat from existing coal fired power stations and use it in greenhouses that cover 50 to 5000 acres and produce fruit and vegetables that we import. Would reduce emissions and reduce the cost of importing from outside of Canada plus the bonus of shopping local!
American energy policy is either out smarting Canadian energy policy or out influencing Canadian energy policy to the Canadian citizen's economic disadvantage. Canada must find ways to export our energy and not be controlled by the United States economic interests. Currently the US gets a significant discount on Canadian oil exports only because we have not other export options. Other countries with huge energy exports are very active in stopping Canadian initiatives to export our energy. They and the US do not want the massive Canadian energy supply to compete for the market share. They us may tactics, environmental concerns etc. , which they ignore for themselves to stop and delay our export options. The solution would have to be political and educational and I am not sure how that can be done. Thanks   
Lets be truthful, governments do not really care about climate change. Once they got people scared about it they come up with the magical solution TAXES. That alone should raise suspicion with thinking people. It is all about the money aka. Taxes to fund the governments social engineering experiments.
A law must be passed to ban all foreign funding to environmental & anti oil groups along with transparency list of all donors. Follow the money to see who and which governments are funding the killing of the Canadian oil/gas industry. I bet that would be shocking.
Environmentalist love to quote 'Per Capita' greenhouse gas emissions for Canada which adds essentiallynothing to global emissions considering our population! While 111 countries support a proclamation calling for the highest political commitment to combat climate change, the real-world facts paint a far different picture. Only countries with a combined global emission share of 17percenthave any intention ofhonouringthat proclamation. And since none of those are significant trading partners, imposing a carbon tax to reduce Canadas minuscule 1.6per cent of global emissions is simply economic hara-kiri.Moreover, carbon emissions from Albertas much-maligned oil sands make up a minuscule 0.15 per centof global emissions. We also live in a cold climate and need to heat our houses foreight months of year. Under thecurrent thinking in Eastern Canada they should be considering how they'll heat their caves when theyend all oil & gas consumption!? The other consideration is the HUGE amount of forest, bush and grasslands in Canada which is an enormous carbon dioxide trap. I doubt the government or environmentalist have even considered this aspect of the Canadian emissions equation. They would much prefer to simply point out the negatives and ignore the positives! Both of the above prejudice the ongoing discussion ofgreenhouse gas emissions and, by association, Canada's impact on global warming which is minimal and may even be negative... And do we really have man-made climate change!? Climate warming and cooling, i.e.: climate change, has been happening as long as Earth has existed. In the relatively short period of time since the last ice age, the Holocene era, the climate has had several warming and cooling periods (see attached graphs)... We didn't cause the majority of them and I suspect we may not be the cause of the current blip either!
In case you can't access the topic's attachment: Holocene Temperature Variation
Let improvements happen naturally Quit trying to force expensive ineficent systems on us
Lets be truthful, the governments could care less about climate change. Once they got people scared about it they come up with the answer TAXES. It is all about the money aka taxes. The feds want more money to spend on their social engineering experiment.
We need pipelines until unforeseeable future. Eventually we will have green energy. Our Government policy does not clearly support pipelines. We lost energy east because of the latter. Montreal mayor had a major saying. Thousands of jobs are lost because of that. We need economists in our Government to give young people and those out of work jobs.
Our National Energy Policy requires a strong voice in the East which is absent. We currently provide lip service to our fossil fuel industry. Our focus in on an agenda to wean Canada off fossil fuels as quickly as possible. That is why the FEDS do not want long-term infrastructure out East. Foreign Oil they can simply let their contracts run out as we SLOWLY wean ourselves off fossil fuels. Our National Energy Policy needs to do 3 things: 1) Eliminate the purchase of Foreign Oil from suspect nations; 2) Build as much long-term infrastructure to be self sufficient and maximize exportation. Global demand keeps growing but ewe are being fed lies that it is shrinking, and 3) Support INNOVATION to GREEN our fossil fuel production towards 'Net Zero' extraction & refining. This leading role in global energy trading will afford us the resources to diversify into renewables effectively and efficiently keeping costs reasonable for consumers in the process.
If I was to comment then my post would look very very similar to the one above. Well said.
Recommendation to Improve Electric Grid Infrastructure Efficiency Correction of the Wires Owner distribution Rate Based Tariff formulas is required so that wires owners, i.e. power distribution companies, are no longer incented to keep distributed generators or customer owned cleaner energy sources off the power grid. Wires Owners should be rewarded not just by how much capital they spend, but also by how efficiently that capital is spent so that they become part of the solution and not part of the problem. Tying distributed generation into the grid can increase efficiency, reduce transmission and distribution capital requirements, provide value adding revenues, as well as reduce emissions. Please see http://www.localpower.org/pol_ratestructure.html
why are we depending on foreign dictatorship oil when we have our own. Stop transfer payments to the spoiled havenot province Quebec until they allow a pipeline
Denis Coderre's actions and comments are criminal. He needs to be ousted for treason. He is acting like a spoiled brat because Trudeau never game him the post he wanted. The sooner we can get rid of Coderre, the better off the country will be. Bye Bye Denis. Time to retire and go hang out with your mafia and biker friends....
An issue such as Energy East should be decided at and only at the federal level. Pull all transfer payments from Quebec no see how fast they realize the benefit of a strong Alberta!
As fun as it is to blame Quebec, when Trudeau appointed Gerry Butts it was obvious the fix was in. This pipeline was never going to see the light of day and anyone familiar with Butts' disastrous record in Ontario knew it. 
Provide incentives/financial help for all Canadians to switch to electric vehicles, and to improve the efficiency of their homes using technologies like solar and heat pumps. INVEST IN A TRANS - CANADA ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION NETWORK! Make travelling by train easier to reduce airplane use. Transition from fossil fuel use and production to diverse forms of renewable energy and create jobs/training in this sector. Support Canadian agriculture and manufacturing and encourage Canadians to buy more locally to reduce emissions from transportation. Strong taxes on polluters based on their emissions but also incentivize reducing emissions. Educate Canadians about climate change, renewable energy, reducing carbon footprints, climate change solutions! Require products to have an estimated carbon footprint (like how there are nutritional labels on food). Include warning labels for high carbon impact sales such as flights, fossil fuels for vehicles, items that have been transported a long ways or had energy intensive production. 
You have excellent points. A few questions getting back to reality: Who will pay for this? How much are you personally willing to pay? All resource revenues provide the funding to transition societies. We have abandoned that concept over ideals and ideals only. If we don't produce fossil fuels to satisfy the earths thirst for basic items. Transportation, TV's, etc..then someone else will while we fall into poverty. Leveraging renewables are fine where the resources naturally exist. (i.e. Hydro in Quebec/ON/BC/NFLD), however, how long has it been and how much energy has the Alberta NDP's put on the grid rolling out their Climate Leadership Plan. Zero. 2 years and still in procurement process for 400 MW. In 40-50 years it takes us to convert, let's starve to death trying and pay astronomic rates for power until they figure it out. We need to develop 'Net Zero' fossil fuels (refining and burning) and exploit all exports and replace foreign oil.
Require products to have an estimated carbon footprint (like how there are nutritional labels on food). Include climate change/carbon warning labels for high carbon impact sales such as flights, fossil fuels for vehicles, items that have been transported a long ways or had energy intensive production.
Create a network of charging stations to connect Canada from Coast to Coast to Coast!
1.IMPORTING FORIEN OIL WHAN WE HAVE ABUNDANCY AT HOME. 2 PAY FORIEGN EVIL COUNTRIES FOR THEIR OIL 3 SLAMMING THE OIL INDUSTRY WHEN WE ARE THE BEST IN THE WORLD AT EXTRACION 4 FOOLISHLY TAXING THE CITIZEN WITH A CARBON TAX FOR NO REASION OTHER THAT DO GOUGE THE PEOPLE 5 WAKE UP!! THE OIL INDUSTRY WILL SHIP OIL, DO YOU SERIOUSLY THINK RAIL CARS ARE SAFER THAN PIPELINES. 6 COMPLETLY DESTROYING A INDUSTRY FOR THE SAKE OF LIBERAL IDEOLOGY
EASTERN PIPELINE FILE ...A FARCE...LIBERAL GOV'T INCOMPETENCE CANADA HAS MISSED OUT ON TOTAL INDEPENDENCE REGARDING FOSSIL FUELS ALBERTA OIL ECONOMY STIFLED AT EVERY TURN ONTARIO RENEWABLE ENERGY PROGRAM A COMPLETE BUST DRIVING PROVINCE INTO BANKRUPTCY..IVE DONE ALMOST ALL I CAN DO TO CONSERVE HOUSEHOLD ENERGY COSTS BUT I AM STILL NOT KEEPING AHEAD OF EXHORBORNANT RISING UTILITY COSTS ! CARBON TAX ...HIGHWAY ROBBERY
I tend to agree with most of the original comment.
I totally agree with these comments. Only one reason for it...Liberals and stupid Canadians who don't know, don't care andlisten to the CBC when they are not watching 'Dancing with the stars'
The planet has multiple looming disasters, science and politics are trying to solve all of them individually by addressing the symptoms of each. If we acted like REAL scientists and did a root cause analysis of all of them we may find that they al have a common root cause. By addressing that root cause we have an outside chance of actually surviving the next 100 years. What we are trying right now is to decrease every person on earth's footprint by x amount in given timeframe, but with the population increasing by a number larger than x we are going backwards. Lets get real and honest with ourselves and admit what the problem is. Thinking as far as the next election will be the end of the human race.
Climate Change needs to be studied by real scientists and not just politicians and tree huggers . The science is not settled , and misinformation abounds . For instance during my 4 years honors Chemistry and Physics I learned that CO2 is a colorless odorless clear gas that is plant food . How dare it be called poison . So lets study the whole thing and prepare to help people who need help after a natural disaster , fires in BC and CA , floods in TX and FL etc.
If we see and understand that a strong well controlled forestry industry can be a tool toward a cleaner environment. Trees up to a certain age take carbon from the atmosphere then slow the process almost to a stop. At this time they should be harvested.
The science is not settled, in that we don't know exactly how much warmer the climate will get and exactly when the polar ice caps will disappear in summer, or exactly how quickly sea levels will rise. But the basic physics of climate change and the heat-trapping effects of CO2 have been known for decades, and the changes from a warming climate are all around us. Here in BC the pine beetle has devastated forests in the Interior regions because winters are no longer -40 for two weeks or longer as they were a few decades ago. Scientists do not call CO2 a 'poison' - although a pure atmosphere of it would kill you - it is only understood to have a heat-trapping effect. We have gone from 280 parts per million in the atmosphere 150 years ago to over 400 now and along with increasing methane it is changing our climate. 
Canada must consider nuclear power as an option to meet its emissions targets and power the future. Contrary to common belief Nuclear energy is very green. generates a very stable base load. It lasts for decades and has zero emissions. Granted you have to deal with the nuclear waste when the fuel rods are spent but you also have to deal with all the toxic waste when the solar panels and wind turbines are spent. The volume of waste per KWH is astronomically higher with wind and solar due to the sheer number of panels or turbines needed to generate the same amount of power as nuclear. Wind and solar are classified as interruptible power as it is not a reliable power source 24 hours per day. A reliable base load power generation station is still required to have reliable power 24 hours per day. Nuclear is also very cost effective and has a small environmental footprint compared to the vast amounts of land required for solar or wind farms.  
Not a nuclear expert, but my understanding is that when you factor in decommissioning and waste disposal cost, the $/MWh makes nuclear a lot less competitive. Let me know if I'm wrong.
According to the World Nuclear association http://www.world-nuclear.org/information-library/economic-aspects/economics-of-nuclear-power.aspx Note the bolded text to answer your question. Nuclear power plants are expensive to build but relatively cheap to run. In many places, nuclear energy is competitive with fossil fuels as a means of electricity generation. Waste disposal and decommissioning costs are usually fully included in the operating costs. Nuclear power is an economic source of electricity generation, combining the advantages of security, reliability and very low greenhouse gas emissions.The operating cost of these plants is lower than almost all fossil fuel competitors.
To be clear I am not anti solar or wind but a healthy debate is needed. This group is pro nuclear. A new study by Environmental Progress (EP) warns that toxic waste from used solar panels now poses a global environmental threat. The Berkeley-based group found that solar panels create 300 times more toxic waste per unit of energy than nuclear power plants. Discarded solar panels, which contain dangerous elements such as lead, chromium, and cadmium, are piling up around the world, and theres been little done to mitigate their potential danger to the environment. http://environmentalprogress.org/big-news/2017/6/21/are-we-headed-for-a-solar-waste-crisis http://www.nationalreview.com/article/449026/solar-panel-waste-environmental-threat-clean-energy http://business.financialpost.com/commodities/energy/solar-panel-makers-grapple-with-hazardous-waste-problem   
I say yes to nuclear energy but the cost is horrendous! This is a job to be undertaken over several years but paid for by oil which we have a lot of. If the experts are right and 2050 is the date then let's go Canada -start by building the pipelines and get the max for ouir oil fir the next 30 years. Canada is a great resource rich Country -stop trying to make it anything else -others want what we have so cherish it!!
To save energy I suggest that you do the following. Eliminate all government travel for members of Parliament and staff. Use of Skype for meetings. Invest current tax dollars that are placed on fuels into science only. No new taxes but investment into alternative fuel science on behalf of the government and then all science to be turned over to the private sector to provide market implementation. Reduce immigration, less people less carbon. Reduce the size of government again less carbon consumption and increased freedom. Lastly government should interfere with energy production. This should be left to the energy sector. Cheap available energy will drive innovation and the economy once government gets out of the way.
I worked for a large international company who totally stopped travel for meetings and saved millions of dollars. Our government people should do the same. They talk about carbon footprint, getting off oil, etc., but do nothing about it. It's our tax dollars that they are wasting.
So much for the election promises of "Transparency" we know very little of what the PM and his crew do, until it's to late.
We must continue to build pipelines to transport our oil safely to the ports where it can be sold. Also we must stop our dependence on foreign oil, Canada is able to provde enough oil for our purposes.
I agree whole heartedly. We are #3 in the world for oil reserves yet we still import substantial amounts of foreign oil. Doesn't make a lot of sense to me. A national coast to coast pipeline system is not only doable, it is necessary and yes, it will create jobs.
We are a long way from getting off oil. Until then pipelines make the most sense. Why import oil from countries that support terrorists and do nothing to help the environment?
Stop taxing Canadians on carbon! Its a scam, a hoax and will be the demise of the Liberal party!
I FULLY AGREE. THE CONCEPT OF SUPPOSED BEHAVIOUR CHANGE BASED ON INCREASED COSTS AS A RESULT OF TAXATION OF THE SNEERED UPON SUBSTANCES, IS UTTERLY RIDICULOUS. THERE ARE NO REALISTIC ALTERNATIVES TO OIL AND GAS THAT ARE COST EFFECTIVE, AT THE MOMENT OUR WORLD IS POWERED BY OIL AND GAS UNTIL THERE IS A VIABLE ALTERNATIVE. IF THE TAXES WERE TRANSPARENTLY GOING TO BE USED TOWARD RESEARCH TO FIND OTHER ALTERNATIVES THEN IT WOULD BE SOMEWHAT LESS OBNOXIOUS. THEY, HOWEVER, ARE NOT AND GOVERNMENTS ARE MUTE AS TO WHAT THEY INTEND TO WASTE THE NEW TAX WINDFALL ON. THE OTHER SIDE OF THE COIN THAT NEEDS FURTHER THOUGHT IS WHETHER THERE IS A REAL NEED FOR ALTERNATIVE FUEL SOURCES AT ALL. WHERE IS ALL THAT ELECTRICITY GOING TO COME FROM TO POWER EVERYONE'S ELECTRIC CAR? WHERE ARE THE TOXIC SUBSTANCES NEEDED TO CONSTRUCT THE STORAGE BATTERIES GOING TO COME FROM AND HOW ARE THEY GOING TO BE SAFELY MANAGED? THE ENVIRONMENTAL SCARE MONGERS CONTINUE TO BE WRONG IN THEIR PREDICTIONS.
Totally agree
Stop taxing -try building -thats what yoi were elected to do!
They can call a new tax whatever name they want to, but the fact remains it's still just another tax. Does the Government expect that I'm going to have a warm and fuzzy feeling and happily pay monies because they put the name 'Carbon' in front of the word tax? Why stop there? Here's some suggestions for more taxes, The 'Human trafficking Tax' or maybe the 'Reduce Murdering Tax', or how about the 'Save the puppies and kittens tax. (that ought to pull at Canadians heartstrings). We're only limited to our imaginations people. I'm sure Canadians can come up with countless other tax suggestions.
Let the general public know an estimate of for how long the natural resources oil & gas will last in Canada. This will help increase its price and will help plan for the future.
Make Canada self sufficient in energy keep Canadian dollars in Canada jobs in Canada put Canada first .Canada should have the highest standard of living in the world but to achieve this it needs unity and theres a lot more disunity now than ever before . i am an emigrant from the 80s and have done well in Canada but Im very dismayed with what I see happening at our borders I see people that will cost Canada and make it like the places they left. Its inconceivable and disgusting that Canada allows terrorists back in after their campaign and rewards some of them .! We need immediate deportation for any new emigrant or asylum seeker that breaks our laws other wise we will not be the place of choice for the best and brightest in the world that could make Canada the best place in the world .
You are 100 percent right my friend, you are a model immigrant I applaud you.
We elected people to do what we the electrate say not what they want -build the pipelines!
The Federal government, the Ontario Provincial Government need to wake up. Pay attention to the needs of the taxpayers. In your rush to find another way to get more money from us to waste you are destroying the very people who pay your wages. Each year we tighten our belts more, lower our life styles more, while we watch our government spend excessive amounts of money on failed projects, high wages, another "study. There is no accountability, no shame, no common sense. If I were 20 years younger I would leave and start over somewhere else. I fear for my children and grandchildren. Shame on all of you.
Well said and totally true. Current governments are the worst Canada has ever seen. Maybe elect somebody who has previously worked for a living and knows the value of earning a dollar. Maybe a background in economics? 
Shame on Canada for choosing foreign oil overtop of supporting our own country. Much research has gone into making the oil sands environmentally friendly plus they restore the land. Oil is in the land already it's not polluting it. Shame for allowing tankers to travel the oceans risking the sea life. Likely killing the White Whales already. Speak up Canada for your global destruction already. Global warming is a scam. Climate change is natural. Learn to adapt to it. We had glaciers covering our land millenia ago. They melted naturally. Let's develop our resources and employ our people. Stop supporting regimes with human rights atrocities. Care for our citizens and our country.
We need to get our oil to our own refineries. Be it by building pipelines or even build the refineries closest to the oil resource. Canada needs to encourage deficit provinces to develop their own industries and stop relying on other provinces to ship them money. Every province needs to build towards a greater country and not just be a leech like our liberal government.
Build energy east . Start now.
WE HAVE TO BE USING OUR OWN OIL NOT THE ONE FROM SAUDI ARABIA TO SUPPORT CANADIANS AND BE ABLE TO SELL TO THE WORLD.
Build a refinery in Alberta to pump clean oil across the country. NO sludge . Build a refinery in Sarnia or near the Quebec border in Ontario to turn it into gas or oil. Then rail to the east coast. This would be until we start producing Algae oil which is carbon neutral. Stop sending our money to foreign countries and employ our own people.
The current Federal Government needs to reverse their cash grabbing Carbon Taxes and schemes for many reasons. My concern is that Canada produces a miniscule amout of the World's pollutants however, Canadians are going to suffer the most economically by these unnecessary tax grabs. What are China, India and the USA, who are the worst, going to do; they still will be spewing their pollutants into the same atmosphere that we are all sharing. Global warming is not totally a manmade happening. Listen to the Scientists!! For all provinces to prosper, we need to extend the Energy East Pipeline now, despite Qubec's and Montral's objection. Qubec should begin to mine all of the Natural Gas that exists in their sub-terrain. Get off of the gravy train called Transfer Payments from what Provinces were once prosperous from developing their own resources then helping the so called "have not Provinces". 
Canadians should support the building of pipelines as this is proven as the safest method to get the resource to market. It is vitally important to Canada's economic well being. Why should we be relying on foreign oil when we can be supporting Canadian industry and Canadian workers?
I believe this pipeline East should be just like the railroad 150 years ago, we are building it for Canada's future, sorry it is on your land but it is for the betterment of Canada as a whole, I am tired of all the hypocrites regarding climate change / global warming. Get on with it.
Ending out dependency on fossil fuels is, for.me,.the ultimate goal...and, but 2050 this should definitely be the reality. Unfortunately we have a long way to go. If oil and gas use was absolutely terminated tomorrow, we would all be in real trouble. Right now we are in.the ludicrous situation of having that which we need, and yet, for the most of the country, not being able to access it. So, here is MY plan.....Figure out the best/safest/least invasive way to transport our oil....thinking pipelines above ground which can be inspected easily (not unlike riding a fenced-in on a.huge ranch)           Build.out own refineries for our oil.and gas, so we can be independent of other countries           Support, finance, development and installation of green energy production, using national funds priced by our new oil.industries            Work on a fixed timeline for phasing out oil.dependency...... And if all these plans are put into place...lock.them.in so that they cannot be changed by the next government (eg. Abortion issue was settles in the last century, but still.can be changed...hmmm)            
Build the pipeline!
In 1967I arrived in Canada as a youngimmigrant. A few months later I learned that Canada had abundant supplies of oil in the western half of the country but was also importing millions of barrels per day ofmore expensive foreign oil into the eastern part of the country. So I said:" Well, that just doesn't make sense. Why doesn't the government build a pipeline from west to east so we can stop relying on expensive imports." 

Well, I was young and nave and didn't realise governments don't actually build anything. But I was still hopeful that somesensible government would throw its support behind this project of national importance. Alas, nothing happened for many years until a couple of years ago when a bold company proposed to build a pipeline they called Energy East. But now, 50 years after I arrived in Canada the dream has been killed. Tragic.

The energy east pipeline should not have been cancelled. We need to get our oil to the east coast. We need to stop our dependence on foreign oil. Only a fool would cancel the pipeline and the oil sands. We will always be dependent on other countries otherwise.
Build the pipeline -do what you were elected to do -look after Canadians!

Canada's cold climate (most of the year) offers energy saving benefits for global IT/tech leaders. Data centres in warmer climates (such as California)require substantial power needs for air conditioners, etc. A 'Canadian' energy, economic, and socio-economicstrategy could be to build the energy and telecommunication infrastructure in our northern regions that can house these data centres and attract investment from global powerhouses. This would create jobs and support our energy sector.Indigenous participation would be welcomed! Think of the Amazon Headquarterexample. We need to think global competitiveness. Possible Key Message "Canada builds infrastructure to support net-zero data centres".
Ok
Most countries would kill to have the gas and oil that we have, and some people say, leave it in the ground,and no to pipelines, those kind of comments border on retardation.----We are importing oil from Saudi Arabia ----stupid government.
We are resource rich -use it -stop following be a leader -Canadians deserve it -use it -other countries are envious, we should not import from anyone -just export!!
A law must be passed to ban all foreign funding to environmental & anti oil groups along with transparency list of all donors. Follow the money to see who and which governments are funding the killing of the Canadian oil/gas industry. I bet that would be shocking.
We should use our natural resources her in Canada, including fossil fuels, to decrease our dependency on foreign oil (especially from Saudi Arabia, a country with poor human rights protection and sponsor of terrorism). Use of our own natural resources will create jobs for Canadians and generate wealth. All the while, pursuing the research and development for new technologies and sources of energy.
No more Saudi Oil -we have enough -build the pipelines!
Nothing happens overnight, as we transition to more and more renewable technology, we have to ensure self sufficiency using our currently available resources. Canada has a safe (work wise and environmentally) resource in oil and gas. We need to use them and move them around the country to keep money within the Canadian family. This means pipelines to get our resources to locations they can be refined.
I agree with your comments here. Canada has the brain power to create and improve the technologies around hydrocarbon energy use as well as renewable energy use. The research and development of these technologies is an area that could use more promotion and still rely on our own rich (hydrocarbon) energy sources rather than from other countries where the safety and environmental regulations are not as stringent as our own. Canada's oil & gas industry is one of the best, worldwide.
I have been saying this for years, the Federal Government should subsidise LNG plants at the west coast. Promote the transport and use of liquid natural gas (LNG) to China and India. LNG is substantially less of a carbon foot print as compared to coal burning electricity production. Pipelines are less of an impact to environment as compared to bitumen. If there is a break in a gas line it will either burn off or dissipate into the air.  This is a medium term solution, advances in renewable industry should be pursued.  
It's ridiculous that this pipeline hasn't been built yet. Stop buyingunethical oil!! Stop endangering ourenvironment by making us use oil tankers and trains, which crash and sink! Start investing in CANADA, and CANADIAN WORKERS!
Pipelines make total sense. safest and cheapest way to move energy.
I couldn't have said it better than Heather Knechtel. Build the pipelines!!

When a taker crosses the Atlantic it emits the equivalency of 7000 vehicles worth of Co2 off-gas. I think that is more that what a pipeline would emit going cross-country which is zero. I wish that the environmentalist would pull their heads out of the sand and stop spewing BS out instead of getting inform. I have worked in the in the industry 45yrs and we are constantly being monitored by a third party on all equipment for emissions, every valves, caps, plugs, flanges, etc., etc... 

 A pipeline would secure all of Canada future, right now because of our Federal Government companies are pulling their investment out and investing in a more "secure" country. So in the big skim of things the Co2 numbers will be going down here in Canada but because in other countries where the regulation aren't as strict the global numbers will be going up and that's where the investments leaving Canada is going.
Build the necessary pipelines that are required to supply Quebec and Eastern Canada with oil and gas from our own resources.
I like the idea That Jeff Callaway had about Alberta and Sask. Oil and Gas going through Manitoba and up to Church Hill. That way we would not be land locked because ofQuebec, Montreal or BC. We need our natural resources getting to market to have jobs right here in Alberta!

 All you tree huggers unless you want to go back to 1890 and get aroundby horse and bug, doing laundry by hand and hanging your clothes out side to dry. Your holidays would not be about going to a different province let alone to a different country. Think about all the batteries that are going to be required for all these electrical cars. Where are you going to store all the useless batteriesor have you thought about that yet. Think about all the resources that are required for all the batteries. How are you going have all the electricity you need without all the oil and gas. Coal mines are shut down because that was dirty. Imagine getting up in the morning no electricity, no Car, no stove, no washer No dryer, no fridge no deep freezer, no furnance. You have solar panels, but there has been a snow storm for the last week, or your batteries for your solar panelquit working. Have any of you people that are so against the oil and gas industry ever had to heat your home with only wood? oh yes that is also a natural resource but heating a home with wood is a lot of hard work and trees burn real fast and the heat does not last long. Have you everhad to hang up clothesoutsider in the winter time they freeze before they dry.  Chasing out all foreign investment because of over taxing and carbon tax aretwo stupid ideas.

 Why are we importing Oil and gas when we have our own natural resources right here? The Alberta Government is killing jobs left right and center.Alberta use to be the engine of Canada how we are becoming a have not Province due to stupid government ideas, rules and policies! I do not think Alberta should have to pay any more transfer payments either if any province does not like our oil then they should not receive one cent of our money from Alberta. 

They want to land lock our oil so it can not get to market then they should receive nothing from Alberta or Sask. untill they want to play fair.They want Saudi Arabia Oil and gas or any other place in the middle east oil and gas then they shouldget theirtransfer payments from them also!If our oil is too dirty then so is our money!


We absolutely need to build pipelines to get our oil to Eastern Canada (Energy East pipeline) and to the West Coast. It is very unclear to me why these things still havent happened. We also need the LNG terminal on the West Coast. Our economy would be booming if we didnt sabotage our own future. Also, I do not believe in the carbon tax that is now being charged Canadians.
I couldn't agree more!

I do believe we need the pipelines and it staggering to me that people want to hold these up- I live in Alberta so I am all for oil and gas; however I am not fully knowledgeable on it all
Pipe lines are the safest and most efficient.
We have been having climate change since the dawn of time,I have forgotten my schooling which said we have had many ? ice ages long before us and there will be another after us, I am sure of that. We had no hand in those other ice ages but we may be having an effect in drawing the future ice age perhaps a little faster than the last. Sad to say though it will come no matter what we do. It is also sad that some of the measures instituted to combat "climate change" are nothing but money changers to help the wealthy. Al Gore and David Suzuki come to mind, hypocrites both who spend vast amounts flying around burning fossil fuels and building fossil reliant homes. SAD.
Simple things like the hundreds of bus's in Ft Mac taking workers back and forth are made in Quebec, valves and couplings tying pipelines and flow-lines together. The petroleum industry spends 1.8 BILLION in Quebec each year. I say Alberta should put a 100% tariff on any product grown or manufactured in Quebec including food stuffs. We will stand by our pristine waters while Montreal dumps billions or liters of sewage into the St Lawrence. Is it any wonder The whales are dying in that area because of their pollution and the tanker traffic.  
Punitive tariffs are divisive. Cut the transfer back in stages by 60% over 5 years.
get rid of the equalization payments and boycott Quebec goods. There are other sources for buses etc.
Canada desperately needs the pipeline from the West, to the Eastern parts. Why do we continue to import oil from the Middle East and elsewhere, when we have an abundant supply within our country?
Canada needs to be self efficient. We have the resources. Which a percentage of oil must go toward Green Energy and made by Canadian industries and innovators. 

To grow the economy and be competitive on the world market. Make Canada believe in itself. No more buying from corrupt and inhuman right countries. That go against our believes. Stop The Insanity.

It is "nuts" that Canada is importing oil at Brent price, and exporting oil at less than WTI. I agree we all need to reduce oil consumption but as long as the alternatives are not feasible all the time for everyone, then we need to behave rationally and use our domestic sources of oil.

When bringing oil into this country it should be subject to all the same guidelines and regulations that producers in our country face. Oil in Canada should be supplied by producers in Canada for as long we have that choice.
All oil used in Canada should be done to maximize our benefit first.
100% agree with you.

The demand for fossil fuels is going up around the world, and Canada is being left in the dust when it comes to supplying the world market. This government has given up on what's best for Canada in exchange for virtue signalling BS. Shame on you.

Need to supply Pietro products domestically Canada should use its own oil rather than so called "tainted oil" from Saudi Arabia. Why should we buy oil from Saudi Arabia, a country that some say has links to terrorism rather than use our own oil thereby helping our economy. Agreed!! Virtue signalling will result in hardship.

Canada has been blessed with an abundance of oil & gas, and should be self-sufficient. It is environmentally and economicallylogical to consume natural resources that are in close proximity to users, transported in the safest manner. Shipping billions of gallons of oil from Saudi Arabia to consume in Eastern Canada, when we could be using our own Canadian western oil, shipped safely by pipeline, does not make sense. 

Foreign oil companies have highjacked our politicians. This needs to stop. A strong Federal government would support CDN resources, jobs and our economy. The majority of CDNs see this logic. The idea of leaving our oil in the ground has been driven by a minority of vocal environmentalists and foreign politicians with alterior motives - ie. They want us to be dependent on them. All we can ask of our government is to PUT CDNs FIRST. Why are we supporting a foreign country by buying their oil at an economic premium and with greater risk? I don't get it.

It's time Canada, a very rich energy country starts to be energy smart . We have all our own oil and gas, but not only that we have wind and sun that has scarely been touched! Why not follow some of Europe's energy examples by burning garbage for energy? We produce so much garbage and just continue to use landfill! Once the plants are built it's free energy and is solving landfill problems!
This is an example of very simplistic and unrealistic thinking. You imply there is plenty of wind and sun (and garbage) that is so easily harnessed for energy it is silly we don't do so already. The reality is there are practical problems that make these sources much less advantageous than using oil and gas. We need to think as engineers, not as part-time drama teachers.
Why aren"t micro,residential combined heat and power units allowed into Canada ??? Because the province of Ontario have turned our Hydro bills into another tax.... There is a process that turns waste plastic into light oil suitable as a motor fuel...This technology should be implimented on a huge scale I love people who fight pipelines..!!! how do they think the oil is being shipped now---by rail tank cars....yeah like that is real safe for the environment......NOT

Decrease reliance on fossil fuels, but there is no single fix. A combination of renewables with a focus on liquid biofuels replacing fossil fuels. Electric cars are not the answer, as battery production and disposal, charging infrastructure, and source electricity all have serious problems. Wind is a poor choice (no base load) and limited life expectancies. Ditto for solar, though it is preferable to wind. Using agricultural areas for wind farms, solar farms or ethanol production is not a great solution. Focus on non-food cellulosic biofuels (sawdust, algae, bagasse, etc).

 In the meantime, pipelines must be built as they are the safest, cleanest and most economical way to transport fossil fuels. Focus on domestic production and refining of fossil fuels; Canada's environmental, human rights and technical expertise make our own oil the safest and most ethical in the world.
Pipelines to either coast are an absolute necessity. The world will be dependent on oil for some time yet and Canada should be taking advantage of our natural resources. 

Pipelines are the cleanest and safest way to transport oil. The government should be looking into converting old oil wells into geothermal producers. The orphan well project would be a great place to start this. It would put many people back to work, clean up an environmental problem, and create a long term, clean energy source. Instead of taxing carbon, as negative influencers have been shown to work poorly at best, the government should incentivize cleaning your individual carbon footprint. Allow people to apply for grants for solar panels or tankless water heaters. 

Tax rebates only work if the consumer can afford the large cost upfront. Our energy future dies not need to be an either/or situation. We can develop our natural non-renewable resources while we also increase our use of clean energy such as nuclear. For instance, instead of closing all of Alberta's coal fired plants, convert them to natural gas. It's a simple process and much cleaner without causing panic about the grid. The government needs to stop looking for a quick fix and realize that it will take years, decades even, to completely switch over to clean energy. Particularly if they make it hard to invest in Canada's energy economy. 

Whats the problem? We need scaleable electricity generation solutions that provide employment, use existing Canadian skill sets, are sustainable and safe, take advantage of existing infrastructure and help us mitigate and adapt to a changing climate. Ideally, these solutions should also help us bridge to a time where technology and consumer confidence in renewables achieves full buy-in from the public.  

 What is one solution? Molten salt nuclear reactors. This technology is extremely efficient and has been around for decades. Actually it was developed by the US Los Alamos lab concurrently with heavy water reactor technology. However, at the time, plutonium was needed as a by-product to enable the development of nuclear weapons and so heavy water technology was prioritized. Molten salt reactors, in particular Thorium reactors, dont create by-products that can be used for nuclear weapons, not even for dirty devices.  An additional benefit is that this technology operates at standard atmospheric pressure. As a result, it is impossible for negative meltdown events to occur such as the events at Three Mile Island, Chernobyl or more recently, Fukushima, Japan. 

In fact, when leaving the lab for the weekend, engineers at the Los Alamos Lab would just let the molten salt reactors melt down as a way or turning them off. The core just turns to a solid with no radiological leakage. On Monday morning, they would just hear it up again and start generating electricity.  Just a few other considerations. Thorium is highly abundant in existing mine tailings, something that Canada has in significant volume. So, while it requires some light processing before entering the reactor as fuel (like other nuclear fuels), we dont have to mine it out the ground. In fact, just one ton of Thorium produces as much energy as 200 tons of uranium or 3.5 million tons of coal. Efficiency win! Thorium reactors produce less than one percent of the waste created by our modern uranium nuclear reactors. The reactors are tiny too, requiring a fraction of a typical reactor footprint and because of their inherent safety, can be positioned closer to urban centres. Less transmission distance is, you guessed it, another efficiency win.  But what about waste? Nobody likes barrels of nuclear waste being buried in Canada for the next ten thousand years. 

I couldnt agree more. Thorium reactors eat existing nuclear waste for breakfast, literally. Its true, they do still create a bit of waste, but when balanced against what they consume, and the fact their waste is more stable and becomes benign in a much shorter time frame, the picture still looks quite rosy. Interestingly, India, who along with China, have the worlds most significant and increasing demand for electricity, has embraced molten salt reactors, including Thorium. The country already has several of these reactors in operation. 

 The technology is sustainable, time-tested, safe, uses existing infrastructure and Canadian skills, is shovel-ready, diversifies our energy supply and is complimentary to renewables.  Lets consider molten salt reactors, and thorium reactors in particular, for a significant role in the Canadian energy supply. 

If we have to have Carbon Taxes and I don't think we should, they should be revenue neutral. Why, if I buy a car manufactured in Ontario, subsidized by my taxes, am I penalized with a carbon tax when I put fuel in the tank. Carbon taxes, cap and trade, just another tax grab.
We are "Canadians" first and foremost. All matters of national interest must be handled from this perspective. To speak from 2 sides of our mouth - one that we stand up internationally for human rights while continuing to import "dirty" oil goes against our most basic moral principles. There is so much at stake here - to have matters of national interest be swayed by vocal special interest groups which are proving to be divisive begs the question - "Whose interests" TRUMP" who's?? Alarmist fearmongering "what-if's "with little or no basis in fact or scientific data hurts us all. This is crying out for calm, intelligent discussion steeped in public education and awareness which translates to LEADERSHIP!

Canada should be using our own gas and oil. We should not be dependant on imported oil. Any imported oil should be subject to same rules and regs as Canadian oil and gas. Imported unethical oil should be eliminated or curtailed at worst. Canadian oil resources should be put ahead of ANY foreign imports.Canadianpipelines should be given priority to eliminate our dependant on imports. We will never be able to eliminate fossil fuels nor should we. 

Environmental activists are celebrating the cancellation of the Energy East Pipeline, and are now redoubling their effort to kill the Kinder Morgan Trans Mountain line as well.  They think that by stopping pipeline construction in Canada, they will stop greenhouse gasses, and stop any danger of oil spills.  How wrong they are.  Liquid petroleum products (gasoline, diesel fuel, lubricants and other chemicals) are essential for transportation and industry.  

Despite massive, uneconomic government subsidies, non-oil energy sources have only replaced a tiny fraction of this fuel requirement, and limitations in battery technology are preventing further progress.   All environmentalists have done by their pipeline blockades is to ensure that the oil we need to keep industry alive is bought from the United States or from violent, despotic regimes like Saudi Arabia and Venezuela, and that it is transported by rail and highway in ways that are far more prone to accidents (e.g., Lac Magantic) than pipelines ever will be.  In truth, their opposition to pipelines increases the danger to the environment. 

 Anti-pipeline activists do more harm than just that. 
 By preventing Canadian oil from being transported to large cities where it is needed and refined in Canada, they force us to deplete hard-earned foreign currency reserves, and prevent any jobs or tax revenue from staying here at home.  This is a classic lose-lose-lose scenario.  Canada has world-class engineering capability to build safe, efficient, cost-effective pipelines in our harsh climate and rugged geography.  

There are Canadian companies ready and well-equipped to build these pipelines, but government tinkering with the regulatory approval process for political gain has made it impossible for them to proceed.  The legacy of this government action will be job losses, capability losses as these companies leave Canada, increased reliance on unsavoury foreign suppliers, and a deteriorating balance of trade.  What we need is a new government approach that recognizes our need for oil-based fuels now and into the foreseeable future, and enacts policy and legislation to bring our own oil to market for the benefit of all Canadians.

Carbon dioxide is critical to plant growth and development. Photosynthesis, the process through which plants use light to create food, requires carbon dioxide. CO2 concentration in ambient air ranges from 300-500 parts per million (ppm), with a global atmospheric average of about 400 ppm. If you are growing in a greenhouse or indoors, the CO2 levels will be reduced as the plants use it up during photosynthesis. Increasing the CO2 levels in these environments is essential for good results. Additionally, there are benefits to raising the CO2 level higher than the global average, up to 1500 ppm. With CO2 maintained at this level, yields can be increased by as much as 30%! Reduce CO2 to much and food production will plummet. 

The elected representatives across Canada have decided not to support the pipelines needed by Alberta to Market its Natural Resource. The job loss impact of low oil prices and limited and delayed pipelines by governments is hitting Alberta Hard. Alberta has contributed billions annually for a great many years. All of this is well known. Canada should now come to Alberta with repayments. 
The country has apparently been ashamed to be known as an Oil Producer so the imposition of an import tax on oil of $5.00 per barrel on this product would fit right into the policies of the current elected Governments. These funds would go directly to Alberta thereby adjusting the harm done to Alberta by the rest of Canada.

Alberta could only use this source of revenue to pay off its debt incurred up to the point of oil dropping below $60.00 per barrel. Alberta must also learn to live within its means. In the event Alberta's acquired debt as listed is paid off, Ottawa would have the choice of continuing the import tax and adding it to the national coffers or ending it.

I applied for KanCare about a year and a half ago. Since that time I have received only inappropriate notices from that
group. This past four months have been a nightmare. I was told that it had been reported that I had moved. Of course, I had not.I notified KanCare as requested by phone. They only have one phone number that handles multitudes of issues. They still
stopped paying my Medicare Premium, but told me, after they had sent me a new application that everything was being
processed. Just keep calling the one phone number. Which I did.

I even called Social Security to see if my benefit was being affected. It was not. Everything seemed (appeared) fine. The day before my benefit was to be deposited into my bank account I was notified by KanCare that the premium had not been paid, but I was now accepted back into the program and I would be repaid within three months.
Social Security notified me of the loss of benefits at about the same time. Apparently they had finally been notified of the stoppage by KanCare. 

Needless to say it was a tremendous shock to adjust my budget to 50% of what I was used to living on in one day. This was done maliciously and deliberately to cause great stress and possible loss of living arrangements. Whoever is running this program now, is not doing it in a manner not conducive to healthy living. Unless I am the only one being treated this way, which I have been told is not the case. In fact I was told by a Mr. Lane

Williams of the Disability Rights group in Topeka, Kansas, that this is a common occurance. Perhaps this group has a constitutional right to express themselves any way they want, but I believe that we as beneficiaries of Medicaid have a constitutional right to be treated in a civilized manner. This group does not appear to know the meaning of the word civilized.

An import tax on foreign oil? Yet ANOTHER tax that ordinary Canadian's have to pay. That's ridiculous. We are being taxed to the limit now. Most Canadian's have very little disposable income as it is. It is disposable income that drives a healthy economy but our leaders seem to have got their economic degrees from China or a Cracker Jack box because they seem to not understand this basic principle. 
Imported oil is taxed at $5.00 a barrel? Wonderful. Another tax that ordinary Canadian's have to absorb. The more we are taxed the less disposable income we have. It is disposable income that drives a healthy economy. Where did our leaders get their economic degrees? One has to wonder. 

I doubt any of them have a economic degree. Trudeau is a trust fund baby, he has never had to work and the money keeps coming in. It is reflected in how he spends Canada's money with no thought to living with in our means.
We do not need to keep oil and gas in the ground if we convert it to hydrogen in combination with carbon conversion by-products. 

EOR and storage will be used primarily in the beginning until we perfect and bring down the cost of scaled-up carbon conversion technologies to the millions of tons per year scale. I believe this can be Canada's lighthouse for North American and globally. I believe Canadians can support this bold new direction which continues to develop our resources but in a new dramatically clean way. Otherwise, we are pushing a rope.

The recent decision by the current Government of Canada to make the flow of Alberta oil east by pipeline economically unfeasible is economic suicide for both the West and the East. Montreal's mayor has it SO WRONG also. Anyone who has taken Economic 101 knows this - perhaps politicians avoid economics altogether in the quest for short-term electoral gain. 

I don't know. But I know that our society totally depends on carbon energy until after an alternative is found and made financially feasible. When the effects of the current governments of Alberta, Ontario and Canada start to be felt - there will be political revolution over what our leaders have done to us all.

The cancellation of the eastern part of the trans-Canada pipeline was a huge disappointment. For one thing Justin Trudeau said he supported the idea while campaigning. The eastern pipeline would provide OUR oil to the eastern refineries instead of paying for foreign oil. Transporting oil by pipeline is the safest, quickest way to do it. 

 Cancelling the pipeline? Another broken promise by Justin and a really bad idea. Why not use OUR oil? It provides jobs and we would not have to send money out of Canada for someone else's oil. 

Maybe it is time to hold a referendum of separation. If successful that would bea huge bargaining tool with the rest of Canada, think Quebec and their failed referendum and the pay off they continue to receive. 

But then again most of Canadaseems to hate Alberta and what we stand for. If they do not want Alberta and our oil/gaswe could then adopt the US dollar as our currency and form closer ties with the US to get our product to international markets. 

Thensecure our borders from those who want to destroy us. Use plain language more often, especially when sharing information with the public. Not everyone speaks "government".

Opening Ministers' offices to access to information requests is essential. If this is not done, everything else is just window dressing

The majority who use Government services are citizens and the processes are not clearly defined when they want services or products. Open.canada.ca should address citizen's needs and other stakeholders such as researchers and scientists. Additionally, the current open.canada.ca web page is not clear on how to find information. 

As a taxpayer, I want to see a government where I can vote by referendum to any spending initiative over a fixed dollar amount.   Say for example, the next time Trudeau want to give our tax dollars to a foreign group to "help women in Africa", he'll have to come to me for my approval, by referendum before giving away our tax dollars

Allowing open government without ever compromising the security of government employees, classified information or federal government assets.  

1 - Canada should strive towards an Open-by-default Government that allows public participation to be the key driving force behind policy development.
MERIT,Security ,Strong Economi,REAL TRANSPARENCY , ACCOUNTABILTY  ,RESPECT FOR ALL RELIGION,

Please look at what India is doing for their open government website - it's bright, attractive, has a lot of community interaction. It assigned who is in charge of which data set - as in a specific person not just some general email of vagueness. 

 Should also look at the Edmonton open data portal and consider using something like Socrata to make visualizations and interactions (but ideally be able to merge different data sets easily to make visualizations)    Also your search terms are garbage - tried looking up "Equalization payments" and turned up nada. Had to search by department, go through various vague data fluffs of transfer payments and finally found... something... but I want more information - How are these decisions made? Why is Quebec getting so much money? Like this is very irritating, your website is ugly, with crappy search terms.    

 I sure hope y'all arn't claiming that posting data fluff is making you open - we want data to keep you accountable! Hiding important information like the equalization payments in hard to search terms etc etc with no proper meta data is a real pain and makes me highly suspicious how committed you actually are to being an open government - the bureaucratic molasses reluctance is a real pain. For instance in equalization payments why are the territories not included? Why are our most vulnerable (read First Nations) not getting the proper water and healthcare? I thought the whole point of equalization was to make sure everyone in Canada has the same opportunities! I also think Geo-spatial information / maps would be cool. 


Some families all of their children come in Canada, and their parents can not remain at their home country and live alone, so they have come to Canada, without economical supporting inevitably ! why because they couldn't work in Canada as visitor! therefore, being concerned about this group of parents wouldn't be trivial thing. 

Honour of the Crown towards Indigenous peoples - honouring treaties, publicizing and respecting the duty to consult.  
1) commitment to First Nations, including better electronic access to remote communities  2) commitment to persons with disabilities, including better government access regardless of ability
Government efficiency -   Government spending
What I find missing in Canadian policy making is non-partisan oversight. The review on a periodic basis of previously passed legislation to see if it is having the desired impact.  If policy X was passed two years ago, is it meeting it's stated aims, is it meeting it's cost target, is it providing the value we thought it would, are there any amendments required to ensure it remains successful, should the policy be scrapped or strengthened. 

Promoting a culture of intellectual diversity, so as to allow for the greatest and most dynamic growth and innovation.

I would like to see real data on all this gender nonsense.  We are boiling the issue down to a single variant, where it is a multivariant issue.  We need honesty.  Data can provide that.  But I don't want to see data buried that may contradict current social narratives that are based largely on feelings rather than facts.  The data needs to speak for itself, be open, and be honest about findings.
Immigration and refugee policies processed seem vague and sometimes cruel.  Everyone would benefit from more transparency and accountability in this area.

Privacy and data protection of Canadians (especially online)
I really hope that government will push to be more accessible, usable and inclusive. Open government should require open data platforms to be natively accessible. Transforming machine readable data into a rendered format is not inclusive and requires technical knowledge and limits Canadians access to data.

making government services accessible and understandable to the widest range of citizens, strive for inclusiveness 
Privacy of personal information in open government environment - how tight the government will control its citizens with all that information received and shared

Electoral Reform 

Resolve conflicts inherent in balancing Open Government principles with Copyright Law (why are crown publications copyrighted?), access to information (Current debate on the bill is short-sighted and uses open government as a smoke screen by assuming everything will be open and, therefore, accessible; this is not true), and existing commitments to Open Government Partnership programs (open data has become prominent but very few government publications are Open)
Strong, healthy, honest relationships with Indigenous peoples. Creation and maintenance of structures allowing for increased Indigenous Sovereignty

Strong protection of Canadian individuals against cyber fraud and identity theft.

More than three of strategic outcomes are very important. I would add safe and secure workplace and healthy environment as a minimum.

I just want to flag that it is difficult to select only three of each and can be frustrating, especially in cases where several issues not only resemble each other, but go hand-in-hand. Limiting to three does not paint an appropriate picture of priorities and values for Canadians.

1. Information availability to potential professional immigrants about the challenges existing in the Canadian employment market  2. Facilitate the entry and integration of professional immigrants into the Canadian workforce  
Strongly supported human rights over corporate interests  Implement progressive rights to personal privacy and information sharing (e.g. EU GDPR)

Not seeing anything about Indigenous peoples ... or diversity with inclusion of all people ... or the increasing economic inequality which marginalised folks (read diversity) are living

The Phoenix disaster points to the need for open development of software by governments. Most of the tools needed are the same across many governments, but contractors want to make each one "special" and charge for custom development. Well-organized open-source tools can save money AND avoid the mess.
The principle of being "open by default" is essential to the success of any open government endeavour. It is presently not being demonstrated by other levels of federal government.

Youth engagements on the multi-facets of government institutions not only political and leadership. 
By population, how are we going to address those who are dependable on others including the institutions a) Children below 18 and b) adults over 65. They need basic income, and top it up so that their security increases to help them to seek better employment opportunities. What can people who are over 65 do if they don't have income to support themselves. c) what can families do with dependents that they need to support  due to mental health issue and other disabilities

reconciliation with First Nations and aboriginal people
Increase sanctions against rogue regimes and corrupt governments regardless of diplomatic consequences and impact this may have on MPs ridings whose electorate may be from the country(ies) in question (i.e. Practice what we preach).    

to bring poverty in Canada down, I suggest to implement / have an Universal Basic Income.bordersto improve social housing  to get rid of the provincial borders for moving products across Canada freely, without the current restrictions 
There should be a way to see who (i.e. which particular members of the government) voted for or against each particular decision made by the government. That way we, people, will know our government better.

Transparency in spending by politicians especially on taking numerous trips abroad at taxpayers expense (huge travel budgets) but with no substantive outcome/rationale for the trip, including politicians family vacations tagged on to official trips at tax payers' expense. 

Role of aspiring immigrants in helping Canada in shaping and transform and transparent government.Being able to use government data to meet my personal/business needs.

Making Canadians choose a top three from a long list of priorities that are all equally important is a false dichotomy and I question the utility and purpose of this survey. Some questions have multiple options that mean essentially the same thing, again muddying the results and clouding the intentions of this survey.


The government needs to help the elderly and the disabled The seniors have paid into this country with all the taxes they have paid and should receive more respect and financial, health benefits than any other age group.  The disabled are treated very bad by our government and this really needs to change. Let the government step up and help them whether they are vets or regular people.  Be more open and help our country first and foremost.

Ensuring that women are considered equally for opportunities throughout Canada in both the private and public sector, and reducing discrimination of people based on age.  As our population is aging, young people think that they can just get rid of the older employed people and take their jobs, instead of respecting elderly peoples experience and productivity.

Youth inclusion and empowerment

On the previous page - it is important to be able to choose more then only 3 strategic outcomes as per the page instructions. As it is not possible to choose only three without missing a number of other critical to Canada strategic outcomes listed on the page. Please review and amend if possible, i.e. "The federal government works to improve the 16 strategic outcomes listed below....."


I think one area that an open Canada really needs to focus on is embracing Open Source solutions, and being transparent in regard to the costs and decisions that lead to procurement of non-free and non Open Source software.

Apply greater rigour in who is granted Canadian citizenship and is eligible for government-paid/subsidized services. Make Canadian nationality mean something.    Implement a rational system to enable financially-able families to sponsor parents. Current practices are inappropriate and even favour the greater proportion of individuals who cannot guarantee that those they sponsor will not create a burden for Canadians.

The largest priority should be providing additional resources to our criminal justice system. (There are too few resources in the criminal justice system:  too few courts, too few judges, too few crown attorneys, massive backlogs, burnout by all within the system, cases being thrown out due to long delays, criminals feeling emboldened because they know full well that their case will never get to court, and worst ..... a massive, growing cynicism by ordinary Canadians who are coming to the realization that there is, basically, not a functioning criminal justice system any longer.

want parlament to be more transparent, minister don't get to vote their own pay raises should be done by independent committee created by non political people

Nothing specific comes to my mind.

Efficient government is also very important.  The fact that Phoenix has not been addressed in the past two yrs and that the number of cases keeps increasing demonstrates a lack of leadership on this file and is a disservice to public servants.

Government websites, the primary tool for public access to government information, are horrendously difficult to navigate and find the information one is looking for. As a federal public servant, I even have challenging trying to find information I am looking for and know exists on my Department's website, so I can imagine it's even more difficult for members of the public. Government has a responsibility to write in plain language, make easily searchable webpages, and design websites that are simple and intuitive to navigate. We have not been successful in that. 

Being able to find data in the form of statistics easily on the open data portal. Having clear instructions and definitions associated with those statistics so that they are useful and easily understood.

Ensuring that the voices of underrepresented groups are heard and that their members are afforded access to and inclusion in open government initiatives. 

honesty  integrity

Realigning our foreign policy to the changing developments ; and tailoring it truly to our international commitments, human rights, international law, and humanitarian law. 

Public servants frequently (often?) feel that they are not kept informed, or consulted, in a fair or transparent way of decision making that will affect them, of particular note are the mostly in camera discussions on staffing actions (please note the recent GAC announcement to abolish all PM positions in the field and replace them with FS positions).  Unions, and therefore staff, have yet to see a business case, ToRs, merit criteria, rationale etc.  Our government is not open, but secretive and protectionist, even with its own employees. 

In my opinion, to increase trust I need to see understand the scientific and/or non-partisan advice that the public service provides - with their rationale. Then I need to hear/see the rationale for the decision made whether they are made by political decision makers or the public servants. I believe this approach will keep both the public service & politicians accountable.  

  I think there are already things that we do well i.e. a diverse and inclusive society, ensuring Canadians are healthy and that we should continue to do those things well.    I think some of the other elements like innovation or a safe place help ensure new solutions and economic prosperity, so that the drivers or keys to other elements should not be ignored.  

  When you share which four are the focus - please tell / explain to me why you picked them. The most chosen, your minister liked them, some other pressure.    Thx.

Stop playing identity politics with every issue. Diversity has nothing to do with transparency and open government, so why is it even a point? The NAFTA negotiations are failing because the Canadian position is focusing on women and minorities. Who the fuck is representing the rest of the population?

M103 should be stopped. It puts Muslim Canadian's beliefs above the rest of the other citizens. We have laws protecting us, we don't need extra laws for a specific group.
Social equity, in gender, race, and sexuality

In the previous question all are of high importance that all Canadians and Government should be held accountable and try to correct

Accountability beyond elections


Honour the treaties, end poverty, especially among first nations youth!! Canada's record on providing for Indigenous youth is *deplorable*.  Clean drinking water, for starters, is a human right that can not be denied under any circumstances.

not miss anything

job security
well managed & efficient government operations;   transparent accountable and responsive federal government;   safe & secure Canada  Healthy Canadians
decrease tax from low income

Privacy by Design is something that must be considered when approaching open government activities. Data scientists need to understand the implications of making datasets available, which if combined, can reveal sensitive personal information. 
Why am I told that it takes 40 weeks to process a change to one line on my 2013 tax return

for persons and/or peoples in  their individual provincial systems of social serviced income help/assistance a national basic income should be instituted at a possible yearly income of $23,000 but with my suggestion these persons/peoples should begin to pay at a special inclusion of income tax clawed back at 5% broken between provincially 3% and federally 2% so they have right to say there making fair payback into system to keep things as equal

Prevention as an approach to reduce the expenses by the programs like health or disaster  

Stop pretending that Alberta is the dirty rotten scoundrel cousin who made his money "in a dirty way" and acknowledge the advancements and enhancements that the oil industry here has made rather than kowtowing to the "so called experts" - IE American celebrities and non informed senators etc) and stand up for Canada already.  Can we please just stop apologizing for having and using our own natural resources.  

More communication about Canadas science policies
Having politicians be more accountable during questions period by answering questions honestly, in detail and without heckling

Elimination of Bilingualism as it exists today.  

What are the protection the govt Is giving to immigrants


Common sense spending.  Over spending seems to have led to "nickle and diming" Canadian citizens, while the government gives freely to international requests.  ie.  Hillary Clinton Foundation.........that was just a bad decsion that the majority of taxpayers are pissed about

Improving the health of our Indigenous peoples  Working towards reconciliation with our Indigenous peoples

- Relationship with First Nations, Inuit, and Metis individuals and groups.  - Ensuring that Canada's social security net, including social housing, improves.

Great progress so far. Keep it up. Working in the open is an important culture shift, and will help reinforce trust.
Continued work to improve the living conditions and well-being of Aboriginal peoples. In particular, child and family supports should be on par with provincial programs. Then there are the education deficits on First Nations....

I think that the government should consider generating publicly-available data about its own activities at every opportunity it's highest operational duty, because that is the only thing that can objectively create opportunities for all of those activities to be enhanced, studied, and improved. 

 Privacy legislation should not be only about what people are not permitted to share, and the exceptions to that restriction. Because that can be accomplished by stating ONLY the exceptions.  

The permission to share should be an obligation to share, with the same exceptions, and systems should be built to facilitate categorizing information between disclosable and not disclosable and disclosing everything disclosable by default.  They don't need to know that I applied for a passport, but there is no reason not to tell them how long my passport application took to process.

tax and benefit reform  Pension reform that seeks fairness as well as protection of pensioners.

CDN GVMT being Superior 'steward' of our highly valued commodity of ALL natural resources and environment


Fair and secure workplace  Democratic institutions 

Sparation entre le pouvoir conomique ( le milieu des affaires, les fortunes...  ) et les autres pouvoirs ( judiciaire, lgislatif et excutif)...


Look at Canada as individual Provinces and recognize that the country does not revolve around Ontario.  There are other provinces that are hurting and need economic growth. 
Youth/young-adult interaction


Employment opportunities for new graduates like me. 
Canada's Leadership in the UN and ongoing leadership and participation in Peace Keeping Operations    

OPINION: Transparency is not only opening the books and showing what we what do, and look what we've done, it's also about having integrity and honesty from everyone involved.  I feel trust is a quality that must be nurtured in everyone involved.  There many times that people in government or closely tied, that are representing the people have their own agendas and forget who elected, or hired them.  Create trust with integrity and things will just be better for everyone.

I think Government is going to far in its reach to stop housing with their rules.  Stick to taxes and interest rates.  Rules that specifically target the lower class is increasing homelessness and not helping anyone.  Government should be looking after less fortunate people.  I don't mind paying taxes to help lessor people but the government is hell bent on making sure that housing is unaffordable to most people.  

40 year amortization is not a bad thing if it allows people to live in a home they call their own.  Crack down on credit card interest rates and qualifications.  Limit the amount of unsecured debt.  People have to live somewhere, we cant all live on the street.


With an aging population health care becomes more and more important.  As well as ensuring there is growth in the economy so that the unemployment rate decreases. Allowing credentials to be recognized when Newcomers come to Canada so they can work and contribute to the economy. Thank you 

I want transparency and accountability. Why is there a limit on how many topics I can get this for? I don't understand why you ask me to choose only 3. I feel like its a referendum and there is no answer that doesn't screw me over.
no that's okay

Before we continue to spend millions of dollars in foreign countries to resolve issues that are not ours nor affect our country perhaps we would be better served investing that money in Canada to try and resolve some of the many problems we have right here at home such as poverty, third world living conditions for many of our First Nations people and under funding of our education and health care systems.
Finding out the best ways to work on change unfair government policies, i.e. sponsoring relatives, spouses making decision makers accountable on major projects like phonex

Thank you for asking my opinion.
1. concern with my Charter Right to oppose legislation that unilaterally imposes abortion and euthanasia on Canadians.  2.  deteriorating health care, e.g. long waits for surgeries and tests 
Taking care of our oceans and fisheries!!!!   Making proper decisions on sustaining & protecting a great fishery! 

You must fix Phoenix.  My colleagues and I are stressed about the loss of trust in our pay system.  Our pay stubs are cryptic so we don't know if we have been paid the correct amount.  Employees are waiting months to be paid correctly. Employees are afraid to go on leave without pay because they will be off the payroll with no confidence in being reinstated.  We have wasted countless hours on fruitless phone calls to compensation.  The compensation officers receive hundreds of calls a day from angry public servants and they are unable to assist because they also have no confidence in the system.  I have been waiting over a year to be paid correctly for an acting  position. 

 I am not in financial hardship so I am at the bottom of the priority list.  In January, $1000 was inadvertently deducted from my pay.  The compensation officer assured me it was a mistake and would be corrected. 
I am still waiting, like thousands other public servants, for someone to open my file and correct the mistakes.  I have no confidence that this will ever be rectified.  

C51 and related security bills have been a blow to free society and are already being used to oppose legitimate protest and groups within the country. We must be vary careful to remember that freedom, free expression, protest, and the charter are fundamental canadian principals; Spying on phone conversations without a warrant is not.


We have experienced an influx of immigrants with no place to live, no jobs. Giving them automatic rights to Health Care, welfare benefits should be earned or deserved. Jobs are at a minimum, we are asking our Vets to live in poverty, our seniors to live in poverty and you provide a roof for people who have not contributed $ or effort for this country and denounce their citizenship oaths, the second they leave the office. Back off on #'s being introduced to Canada, advise them of our values culture, if they still want to come, adapt, not the other way around.

Just this analogy, fishermen use lobster pots to catch lobsters, so don't use a big net to catch a few fish.
"The government needs to actually set up strong oversight committees yesterday, and to stop the war against Environmentalists and First Nations.  This undermines the legitimacy of any government in fighting terrorism or extremism.  It's very clear that the Government is too busy spying on the opponents of pipelines to actually deal with these lone wolves.  For example, how is it that someone can be under surveillance for years for engaging in indigenous solidarity work so much that their every moment is watched by CSIS and the RCMP, but Aaron Driver was able to steal explosives from work and make a completely ineffective bomb, and was eventually killed?  It seems to me that the RCMP failed, and there's no way for these incidents to be investigated in any way, shape or form.

The RCMP keeps behaving badly, manufacturing terrorists such as Nutall and Driver, and we're meant to applaud them when they kill the terrorist or botch the case instead of allowing them to be prosecuted and for them to rot in jail?  It's clear that the current oversight of national security isn't working for anybody, and the current system is failing Canadians.

There's also the fact that CBSA does not have any review body whatsoever, and that there have been quite a few cases of sexual assault at the border, on various individuals crossing the border, and on their own staff, as reported by VICE.  This is in addition to the ballooning mandate CBSA has received over the past few years of detaining people indefinitely based on their immigration status, and increasing their profile with ridiculous stunts such as the Border Security television show.

During the last decade, the Public Safety ministry has run completely amok, with money from the Olympics and G20, and laws from the Conservative government creating this monster that is accountable to no one.  According to Edward Snowden, these agencies have the least oversight and spy on their citizens the most.

Filling this survey out was done because I believed that I should do it so that I said I did.  I don't expect the Liberal Government, the people who created PROFUNC during the Cold War to do anything about state surveillance other than to increase it.  Despite political noises saying that this government is different from the Harper Government regarding surveillance, since the Liberal Party did vote for C-51, and this government is still detaining people without charge indefinitely based on their immigration status.  Worse yet, this government is using their poor human rights record as a way to bargain with the Chinese Government, something that the Conservatives would never ever do.

I view this consultation as a farce, especially since many people in the media aren't taking it seriously and don't care about being spied on as long as they can watch their Netflix and download stuff on BitTorrent, which his a shame.  Once again, I'm certain that the government will be on the wrong side of history as usual."
Bill C51 was a bad starting point for the paper.
Leave well enough alone. Give it a chance to work.
"Just because a terrorist organization may change there name . Isn't reason to claim ignorance, and supply arms or money from our government 

Btw.... I'm pleased so far on our new government and it's ability to reach out. It's a breathe of fresh air as compared to the Harperite Era. 
Also...Look after us veterans and any future veterans we are this nations son and daughters and there must be equality in recognition. I know you're as a government working on this .....get it right

*"
Put more money into mental health in this country and give parents more rights to help with a problem after their child has turned sixteen as I firmly believe that between the ages of sixteen and eighteen is when they are most vulnerable to ideas they hear on social media. This seems to be the age when they are not sure of themselves or their future and more open discussion needs to be addressed! It was always called peer pressure and whatever the term is now, to me, it's still the same.
Put more money into mental health in this country and give parents more rights to help with a problem after their child has turned sixteen as I firmly believe that between the ages of sixteen and eighteen is when they are most vulnerable to ideas they hear on social media. This seems to be the age when they are not sure of themselves or their future and more open discussion needs to be addressed! It was always called peer pressure and whatever the term is now, to me, it's still the same.
Bill C-51 came around because of need to help law enforcement intercept criminal and terrorist activities. I personally think it's the wrong approach. We as a society need to work on removing the conditional that allow these people and entities to survive. We can achieve this by enhancing our sense of community and belonging at the local level. By improving the environment where communities have a clear sense of belonging and sense of purpose, they in turn we aid in reporting and identifying those who do not belong or try to hurt that sense of community. 
"Many Canadians think that public safety are public health and safety (such as vaccinations, distracted driving, drugs, drinking and driving, seat belts, sexually transmitted diseases. etc.) frontline police, firefighters, armed forces, coast guard, legislation and our security agencies. In fact, the best public safety is always a well educated public, public service and politicians. 

Everything a country does falls under the umbrella of national security. Everything! Including agriculture and education. An improved educational system is key to success. The provinces are failing. Canada needs a national educational strategy that the provinces will implement. Courses such as Modern World Issues need to be correctly taught in schools. No exceptions. 
"
nope
Not read my emails 

No matter what the solutions to each of the respective topics there is a critical requirement to ensure that the RCMP and CAF are properly equipped to deal with them. Not to point any blame at any previous government but there has been a lack of investment in capital purchases to ensure the proper tools for the jobs are maintained. We have consistently fallen back in technological equipment as well as just plane rust out of existing equipment. We don't necessarily require the most expensive equipment in the world, but certainly need equipment and personnel that are compatible with our allies. We don't need to be prepared just for terrorist activities but also need to be prepared for conventional threats as well. Russia has been presenting an increasing threat globally in recent years and this can not go left unchecked. Not suggesting we need to be a military society but our military does need to be more capable in terms of equipment and numbers of personnel to better respond to all types of threats.
"Quis Custodiet Ipsos Custodes?

No government is beyond reproach.  No department immune to corruption.  The laws you create must safeguard against abuse not only by those currently in power, but by all those who are yet to attain it.  

The elected - and especially the unelected - members of our increasingly vast and sprawling government must regularly and continuously be reminded that theirs is not to rule but instead to serve.  Checks and balances must exist for those moments when governments, law enforcement, spooks or civil servants fancy themselves above the law or seek to twist the law to serve ends not in the common good.

The precepts of the presumption of innocence and minimization of interference or restrictions in the lives of Canadian citizens and residents must be adhered to.  

Above all else, we must not let extraordinary powers whose noble purpose is to protect against extreme events such as terrorism become so normalized that we will unceasingly surveil an entire nation to find someone putting out one too many garbage bags, enjoying a joint or jaywalking across an empty street.

These powers have been abused in other nations.  They have been abused here.  Do not be so arrogant as to presume they won't be abused in the future."
Nowhere is radicalisation mentioned as a phenomenon largely brought about by religion. I'd suggest banning - yes, banning - all religious education of children prior to age 15, when they could be introduced to the menu - "this is what the catholics believe, this the protestants, this the agnostics, this the atheists - take your pick now that you have (hopefully) learned critical thinking and matured". I regard all  religious education of those too young to evaluate it as tantamount to child abuse. It ain't just muslims who espouse violence......

Publicly report to the public on national security matters and ensure public is well informed on safeguarding our rights and freedoms. If a national security agency violates our rights and freedoms, they should face penalities such as charges, fines or even loss of job. 
do not change the legislation just because the conservatives introduced it. liberals voted for it, don't water it down now.

Je crois que le gouvernement devrait s'assurer que le droit  la vie prive des canadiens n'est pas bafou avant tout. Cela devrait tre la premire proccupation de la dfense nationale. 
Get really serious about digital and information technology defence and offence
It's important to do what is right, rather than what is politically expedient. The necessary changes likely aren't sexy, but they're more important. 
"The government needs to make a strong and radical change to immigration policies in the interest of Canada's financial interests and national safety. Immigration has become a bi-partisan political tool for the purposes of votes and is wrong to be allowed to do so. Then there is the criminal element and influence pedaling within the immigration department. Case in point when McCallum announces a triple down of Chinese immigrants to Canada just before Trudeau's trip to China. Are you kidding me! With the financial corruption and money laundering on the west coast the real estate bubble, the drugs and crime, come on get a grip.While foreign investment makes a house un affordable for Canadians. Canada has a large deficit and is shutting down national pipelines which dose not help our own economy with only 1.7 percent of the worlds total carbon dioxide emissions by the way .
Trudeau is a panderer to Chinese and Muslim interests at the expense of the rest of Canadians in the name of political correctness and environmentalism. All this PC/Green is starting to make me gag over the current government policies increasing every day."
Get rid of the rose colored glasses, open your eyes and see the real world. I have seen the world and know that we are being taken advantage of because of our soft laws and rights!!
We are all one!
reduce muslim immigration/refugees


Intelligence agencies are criticized when terrorists are successful; they are also criticized for having too much power. The Government needs to explain to Canadians why security agencies are necessary for our well-being. Canadians tend to forget that the world is a "scary" place; being able to understand and anticipate threats to our nation is in our best interest. 
"I did not read the Green Paper, however, I did read the Quran, and I find it absolutely unacceptable, a call to terrorism from its followers, the very definition of hate speech, bigotry, fascism and Mysoginy:

ACTUAL Quotes from the Qur'an (Koran), the Holy Book of Muslims who follow Islam:

2:189 Fight in the cause of god those who fight you.... Slay them wherever you fall upon them, and expel them from where they had expelled you; apostacy by force is indeed more serious than slaying.  Do not fight them near the Holy Mosque, unless they fight you therein.  If you fight therein, slay them: such is the reward for unbeleivers.

2:214 Fighting has been perscribed for you, although it is a matter hateful to you. And yet, for all you know, you may hate something and it is good for you.

2:216 Forcing people into unbeleif is a graver sin than slaughter

2:220 Do not marry polytheistic women unless they beleive.  A female slave, who is a beleiver, is better than a polytheistic woman, even if winning your admiration.

2:221 Re: menstruation Say: 'It is a sore. So keep away from women in menstruation, and do not come near them until they become clean.

2:226 Women have the selfsame rights and obligations in conformity with fairness, but men are a grade more responsible than them.

2:243 Fight in the cause of God, and remember that God is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.

3:12 Say to those who disbeleive: 'You shall be overcome and herded into hell  and what a wreched place of rest!'

3:17  The right religion with God is Islam
3:20  Those who blaspheme against the revelations of God, who kill prophets unjustly, who kill those who bid mankind to fairness  to them announce tidings of agonizing torment.

3:27  Let not the beleivers adopt the unbeleivers as allies in preference to beleivers.

3:148  We shall cast terror in the hearts of those who disbeleive, because they associated with God that regarding which he had revealed no sanction

3:194 As for those who emigrated, and were driven away from their homelands, who suffered harm for my sake, who fought or were killed, I shall wipe away their misdeeds

4:1 Marry whoever pleases you among women  two, three or four; but if you fear you will not be fair to them all, then one only, or else what you own as slaves

4:10  God commands you regarding your children: to the male what equals the share of two females

4:12 Whoso disobeys God and his messenger, and transgress his bounds, god shall admit him into a fire, abiding therein forever, and abasing torment awaits him.  

4:14  As for your women who commit adultery, call four among you to witness against them.  If they so witness, confine them to their homes until death overtakes them or else God provides another way for them.  And if two males among you commit indecency, rebuke them harshly.  If they repent and make ammends, leave them alone.

4:22  Do not marry women that your fathers had married, unless that act belongs to the past,...

4:23  Forbidden too are married women, unless they be your slaves.

4:24  If there is one among you who has not the means to marry free, chaste and beleiving women, let him marry from among your female slaves, believing maidens.....So marry them with their owners' consent and render them their dowries in kindness,.....

4:33 Thus, virtuous women are obedient, and preserve their trusts, such as god wishes them to be preserved.  And those you fear may rebel, admonish, and abandon them in their beds, and smack them.

4:43  Among Jews are some who distort the words of revelation from their context....but God has cursed them for their blasphemy, and they beleive not, except for a few.

4:54  Those who blasphemed against our revelations  we shall scorch at a fire.  Whenever their skins are charred, we replace them with new skins, so that they taste the torment. God is almighty, All-wise.

4:87  Re: Blasphemers Do not take them for friends until they emigrate in the cause of God.  If they refuse, seize them and kill them wherever you find them, and do not take them as friend or ally, except for those who arrive at a clan with whom you have a covenant, or come to you, their hearts too despondent to fight you or fight their own clan.

4:90 If they do not stand aside and propose submission to you, nor hold back their hands, then seize them and kill them wherever you find them.  Over these we have granted you explicit sway.

4:91 No beleiver is to kill another save in error.  Whoever kills a beleiver in error, the freeing of a beleiving slave is decreed and blood money handed over to his kin, unless the latter forgo this as an act of charity.  If he belongs to a clan which is your enemy while he is a beleiver, the freeing of a beleiving slave is decreed.  If he belongs to a clan with whom you have a compact, then blood-money is handed over to his kin, and the freeing of a beleiving slave.  He who finds not the means, then fasting for two consecutive months is decreed, as penance from god.

4: 99  Whoso emigrates in the cause of God shall find on earth many places of emigration and abundance.

4:102  God has readied for the unbelievers an abasing torment....Once you feel secure, perform the prayer, for prayer at a set time is decreed upon the beleivers.  And do not falter in pursuit of the enemy...

4:104  We revealed to you the Book with the Truth in order that you may judge among people as God has shown you.

4:113  Whoso defies the messenger after right guidance has become clear to him, and follows a path other than that of the beleivers, we assign to him the master he chose to obey, and scorch him in hell  and what a wretched place to end!'

4:139  God has revealed to you in the book that if you hear the verses of God blasphemed or mocked, do not sit with them until they broach another subject; otherwise you would be like them.  God shall herd all Hypocrytes and blashpemers into hell.

4:159  Thus, through the wrongdoing of the Jews, we forbade them certain delectable foods which had been made licit to them; by reason, too, of their obsrutcting the path to God, repeatedly; their taking usury, through forbidden to do so; and their devouring the wealth of people dishonestly  to the unbelievers among them we have readied a painful torment.

5:3  Licit too are chaste women from among the believers and chaste women from among the People given the Book before you, once you have paid them their dowries in marriage and not in fornication or in secret dalliance.  

5:8  But those you blaspheme and cry lies to our revelations, these are the denizens of hell.

5:32  In truth, the punishment of those who make war against god and his messenger, and roam the earth corrupting it, is that they be killed, or have their hands and feet amputated, alternately, or be exiled from the land.  This would be their shame in the present life, and in the next a terrible torment awaits them  except those who repent before you gain mastery over them.

5:37 The male thief and female theif; cut their hand as a penalty for what they reaped  a punishment from God.  

5:40  O Messenger, grieve not for those who are quick to blaspheme, among those who say ' we believe with their mouths, but whose hearts do not beleive, nor for the Jews who often lend their ears to falsehood or to other people who have never visited you.

5:50  O believers, take not Jews and Christians for allies; they are allies one of another.  Whoso among you takes them as allies is counted of their number.  God guides not the wrongdoers.

5:53  O blievers, whoso among you shall apostacize from his religion, let him know that God will bring forth a people whom he loves and who love him, humble towards the believers but mighty against the unbelievers, who exert themselves in the cause of God and fear no blame from any quarter
5:63  The Jews say: 'The hand of God is shackled!' May their own hands be shackled and may they be cursed for what they say!

5:54  Re: people of the book: ...but many of them  wretched and wicked are their deeds.

5:81  You will surely find that the most hostile of men to the believers are the Jews and those who ascribe partners to God.

5:89  O believers, wine and gambling, idols and divinding arrows are an abhorrence, the work of Satan.

8:11 I shall cast terror into the hearts of the unbeleivers.  So strike above the necks, and strike their every finger!' For they defied God and his messenger, and whoso defies god and his messenger, god is severe in retribution.  Here it is: so taste it!  For the unbeleivers the torment of the fire!

8:54  The worst of creatures in God's sight are the unbelivers for they have no faith  those with whom you contract an obligation and they break their word, every time, without fear of God.  When you meet them in battle, scatter them utterly as a lesson to those coming after them  perhaps they will reflect.

8:56  Prepare against them whatever force and war cavalry you can gather to frighten therewith the enemy of God and your enemy,, and others besides them whom you do not know but God does

8:63  O Prophet, urge the beleivers on to the fight.

9:4  Once the sacred months are shorn, kill the polytheists wherever you find them, arrest them, imprison them, besiege them, and lie in wait for them at every site of ambush.

9:27 O believers, the polytheists are indeed a pollution, so let them not approach the sacred mosque beyond this year of theirs.

9:28  Fight those who do not believe in God or the Last Day, who do not hold illicit what God and his Messenger hold illicit, and who do not follow tyhe religion of truth from among those given the Book,...:

9:29  The Jews say Ezra is the son of God while the Christians say Christ is the son of God.  This is what they say, from their very mouths, thereby agreeing with the speech of the unbelievers who came before.  May God strike them down! How they pervert the truth!

9:122  O beleivers, fight the unbeleivers near you, and let them find you harsh,...

22:18  For those who blasphemed, garments of fire have been tailored, and over their heads is poured scalding water, melting therewith their innards and their skins. Upon them shall be clasps of iron; whenever they seek to escape their torment, they are driven back to it; 'taste the agony of the raging fire!'

47:2  When you encounter the unbeleivers, blows to necks it shall be until, once you have routed them, you are to tighten their fetters.  Thereafter, it is either gracious bestowal of freedom or holding them to ransom., until war has laid down its burdens.

Definitions:
Apostacsy: A total desertion or departure from one's religion.
Infidel: a person who does not accept the Islamic faith; kaffir.
Kaffir: a person who does not accept the Islamic faith; Infidel
Unbeleiver: a person who does not accept any, or some particular, religious belief. 
Blaspheme: To speak evil of; slander; abuse. 
Koran (Qur'an): the sacred text of Islam revered as the word of God, dictated to Muhammad by the archangel Gabriel, and accepted as the foundation of Islamic culture, politics, Sharia law.
Polytheistic: Pertaining to, characterized by, or adhering to polytheism, the doctrine that there is more than one god or many gods
Emigration: to leave one country or region to settle in another; migrate
Muslim: Someone who beleives in the above doctrine of Islam (a beleiver).
Sharia Law: The legal system governing members of the Islam, considered infallable law of god by followers.
Halal meat: Meat prepared in the Islamic way, from animals that have been slaughtered inhumanely:  Muslim butcher shouts Alahu Akbar then cuts the juggular artery, cartoid artery and windpipe, without cutting or breaking the spinal cord, and then lets them slowly bleed to death, while they are fully conscious, with nervous systems fully in tact, without being stunned. 

Please share this with anyone who thinks Muslims are entitled to freely immigrate, practice, and flaunt this BIGOTED, FACIST form of OPPRESSION and spread the seeds of TERRORISM in our nation. 

Freedom of Religion has gone too far.  Islam is un-Canadian.

outside country cloud services health care info need safeguarding.

Canada needs to focus less on pleasing the world and start working to protect and enhance those law abiding citizens here at home. Also ther is no need to pander to all these special interest groups or religions. They knew befor hand what life here was like.  If they don't agree with our values and beliefs, then they should leave and not as our government has chosen of late to have us capitulat to their wishes. 

Canada needs to focus less on pleasing the world and start working to protect and enhance those law abiding citizens here at home. Also ther is no need to pander to all these special interest groups or religions. They knew befor hand what life here was like.  If they don't agree with our values and beliefs, then they should leave and not as our government has chosen of late to have us capitulat to their wishes. 
Get a hard punishment for all terrorist related activities, anyone CONVICTED in a court of law as terrorist should not bear Canadian citizenship and should be deported if possible or given sentence long enough to keep them off the streets for many years, then some will start to think twice.
Yes Close the borders to those who do not assimilate into Canadian cultures. This is not about who will vote for you but about Canadians who will assimilate and follow our laws and traditions. PERIOD!!
"I didn't read the whole document, however what i know is.
If any law could have stopped mentioned issues, why no one country in the last decade was successful?. Peoples are more in fear then before even in high security country.
So for Law, i would say
-Strong the law but for all, we see violence, drug crimes, young guys getting killed in Canada in drug violence, but unfortunately i haven't seen such a survey for that, why?
It is very clear, that we only wants to target Muslims!!!

In short from law perspective:
The people involve in making or changing the law shouldn't be biased which was the case in previous government

Canada should do leading role in current policies towards peace and not indulging in issues on the name of ""safety""
I would like to explain more as a Muslim but never find a forum where government invites people"
Please repeal Bill C-51 , urgently and permanently with no foot dragging!
The Russians are coming! Don't be distracted by the Ukraine. Russia plays chess 24/7. They have Dozens of Icebreakers. Think of them as pawns (glimpse into the future) for the next military expansion of territory. When our own arctic territory will be under threat. We weren't invited to anti-Isis coalition meeting because we have NOTHING of military value to provide support with. Liberals never INVEST in the military. Sunny ways. Peacekeeping is a RELIC of the cold war. Invest in NEW military hardware. Subs are a money pit, cancel now. Already to old to be of use. Reality check.
Scrap Bill C 51. Liberals refused to listen to this advice from three former Prime Ministers?
Focusing too much on the threat of attack and warning Canadians about it constantly does nothing but affect our concern level on a day-to-day basis. I'm not saying we should live blind to the threats but overall Canada is very safe and the few odd radicalized individuals or outside terrorism will always be a risk but so is a meteor striking the Earth or getting into a plane crash. If we don't focus on them (but still put in proper safety measures) Canadians will relax. 
Only immigrants that desire to assimilate into Canadian Society and adopt our Democratic Value System should be admitted into this country . Allowing Immigrants inside our country to merely create voters is not only wrong but it is totally unethical .
"1) Be proactive so stop wasting time, money, and resources on studying past events and think that past behaviour is predictive of future. 
2) Stop wasting tax dollar funding academic paper which amount to nothing.
3) Stop debating, you were elected to take decisions so just decide. Please consult but stop discussing and take a harder stand on terrorism."
pursue real threats, policing in Canada has greater funding that ever before and statistically crime is way down......invest in society's social programs that have been gutted by the last government.....bring the First Nation, Metis, Inuit's living conditions up to Canadian norms the state of which is a real crime
Trains official for internet and internet's of things
The day I see members of this govt stop the mollycoddling of dangerous criminals and actually standing firm for real Law and Order ,VICTIMS rights ,get serious about deporting terrorists , stripping citizenship from 'dual' criminals etc etc then I might have confidence that this is nothing more than another useless public relations scam !!! 

This document appears to be phrased in a very pro-security manner, it does not adequately address the very real privacy concerns of Canadian citizens.
The Bill C-51 brought forth by the previous Government contained overly-vague definitions regarding protest and overly-vague control over acquired information.  In this latter regard, one should not be able to give one's private information to one Agency which can then be redistributed to 'whomever' and 'whatever' depending on need.  I believe that the Privacy Commissioner has concerns in this regard.  And Yes, I do agree that prevention is better than acting after the fact.  Security Agencies have to be given sufficient leeway to protect us properly - under active and pro-active scrutiny, oversight and judicial review.
I really love that you are doing this consultation, as I truly believe this gives everyone the opportunity to have their voice heard. I heard about this through The National on CBC, and I hope you continue to use avenues like CBC to communicate about these consultations. Even Power & Politics would be a great way to promote this, and to communicate what you are asking Canadians to consult on. Overally, extremely impressed that you are consulting us, using technology like the internet to get feedback. Thank you, and I hope you get a bunch of responses on this important topic. 
"The C-51 needs to be re-explored and re-branded.
"
When it comes to the Islamic State, we must be aware that this is a political, criminal group which is disguised as faith based. It should be always treated like the parasite that it is, and destroyed wherever it comes up from under the rock it was born under.
When seeking consultations it is important to ensure you have sources from outside of the military, policing, and spying arena.  These sources of information rely on threats to secure funding and ensure they continue to exist.  That will always taint the opinion to spend more and get more powers.  You must find balance in collecting information.  You'd have an easier time wining the lottery then finding a General who doesn't think the military needs more funding. 
"General comments:
- higher level of oversight required with respect to information that is available on the internet. This should be a ""responsibility"" of all security agencies in all countries, including Canada.
- surely there must be a way to track citizens who are viewing radical content
- no need to dedicate additional taxpayer funds to new agencies -- give existing agencies the tools and authority
- it is imperative that security agencies must have the ability to ""share""
- the whole idea of a terrorist peace bond is somewhat baffling -- if an agency has knowledge of an individual who ""may"" be considering a terrorist act, and that individual is a foreigner then deport the foreigner to his/her country or origin and prevent the individual from ever returning to Canada. If the individual is a Canadian, then incarceration may be the answer. 
- the practice of Protectoin of Witnesses is a good practice because it protects friend/family members who may have to turn in a friend or family member who is considering an act of terrorism.
- laws have not kept up with technology -- agencies must have the ability to seize/forfeit and/or remove propaganda on the internet that may encourage terrorism
- laws must be updated. Concerning is the fact that Apple would not the San Bernadino terrorists i-phone. Update Canadian laws to ensure that if/when a similar terrorist act occurs on Canadian soil, that technology and technology service providers are obligated to act in the BEST INTERESTS of all citizens, not just the criminal -- what is best for the majority?
- while stated previously, I believe emphasis has to be placed firstly on the RESPONSIBILITY of citizens, and when citizens act RESPONSIBLY, then their rights will remain intact. Anyone who acts irresponsibly and tramples on the RIGHTS of others, should lose their individual RIGHTS.

Thank you for the opportunity to provide my opinions in this very important debate."
Refugees have to prove how they will integrate into CANADIAN society, and not create their own ghettos.  They are pushing their religious beliefs onto our society which is wrong as if they have more rights than Canadian people. There is no guarantee, at this time, that they are not or may become terrorists in the future. Also, their sponsors should be accountable for their actions and their entire livelihood.  They have the right to practice their religion as we all do!!! Theirs is not better than ours!!! 
Integration is a key part of becoming a Canadian Citizen.  What we have seen since this started is lack of integration and their demand for Sharia law, which is totally discriminatory to Canadian laws and values.  They come here seeking a new way of life, yet, what they are actually doing is trying to convert us to their religion as the white people did to the Indigenous people of Canada.  I support Bill C-51.  Every member of parliament should be a sponsor for one of these refugees. Also, take into consideration Australia's example:  If you don't like our customs and laws- then leave!!!!!  We are being pushed aside as taxpayers as we have lost many of our rights; Example:  We are discouraged from saying Merry Christmas, and our Catholic children are no longer allowed to say the Lord's Prayer in school, yet the muslims have a special room where they can pray on their carpets!!!!  How is this integrating into our society?
We need to stop worrying about the rights those trying to come to Canada and look after the people here and  who have worked all their lives here. It cost taxpayers millions dollars and we have true Canadians going hungry and homeless.
This is an incredibly biased and fake consultation.  It does not address privacy issues and the threat of mass surveillance and how that chills citizen participation, discourse and dissent. 
As a born and raised Canadian I feel that I have to adapt to new religions and beliefs instead of new immigrants. I've had the pleasure to work with many people from different countries, religions and beliefs and they respect my beliefs as well but as time goes on and we push our beliefs and pride aside to accommodate others we are opening the door to terrorism and radical beliefs. Maybe a couple more selfiea from our PM will make me feel safer. He needs to do his job! 
My point is that a paranoid government has absolutely no friends.  Harper's regime seemed to be loosing its friend base...C51 was also an expression of that paranoia.  Please govern with confidence.  
Your insistence on requesting citizen participation for national security shows you have no plan, nor experience, in protecting us. Your lack of initiative is deplorable. You also have no backbone. Your inability to make any decision is a sign of your government being a group of weasels. You should all be ashamed of yourselves.
Constitutional rights are important, but they carry a responsibility to respect laws and fellow citizens.  Those who support terrorist organizations or ideology, and in particular, terrorists returning to Canada, have self-identified as not respecting laws or the safety of fellow Canadians and should be subject to laws and sanctions that prevent them from causing harm. 
Document, the quran for one you should read and teach Canadians what is truly in the quran or how about the hate literature the islamist hand out to Canadians all over Canada. These booklets are all over these mosque, all over Canada.  Islam from darkness to light, that was the one *  handed to by a muslim man 3 years ago at a gov rec-center, it is full of hate, discrimination against women and children, gays and the jewish people, but heh the RCMP said that yes it was hateful but it was ok to hand out, that was disappointing to say the least.. How about start at the mosque, you know the place where these terrorist hang out at, where they meet, it does seen to be the common place they meet when you do the research after each terror attack.. How about charging the media for misleading the canadian public onto why and who are trying to kill us.  . You know it. And I know it.  And millions of Canadians know it that you you wont do anything, this is all for show.
This is a fantastic country to live in. We should not allow foreign cultures to take precedence over the long existing values of Canada. Folks who are moving here see it as a superior life style and should be more flexible in adapting (excluding religion) 
FIGHT ISIS!  Boots and bombs.  Stop pussy footing around.
I believe that the Anti-Terrorism Act should be repealed.  Full stop.
"Our right should come ahead of all others as citizens ,not terrorists and their co-horts.
Sending our money out to help build terror or a fake climate change does nothing for our countries reputation
Don't give into xenophobia. Continue and in fact increase your efforts to accept refugees into Canada, and not just from Syria. Young men stuck in refugee camps are at the highest risk for radicalization. Canada should be proud for letting in 25,000 refugees. But we can do much more. Experts say we easily have the capacity and capability to take in at least 250,000 annually. How can we say we've done enough when there are an estimated 60 million refugees worldwide. These people are victims not terrorists. Canada is a great country. Let's make it amazing.
don't discriminate people due to their backgrounds. Everyone should have the same punishments.
One day I hope the depth of the corruption of the government gets laid bare for all to see. But I'm not holding my breath. 
The Green Paper shows that the government is taking a step in the right direction, but citizens also need to address these concerns by finding better means of resolving conflicts between themselves.  Norway and Finland are great examples of how to create cultures of peace and valuing human life, which is what is needed to avoid the urge to resort to terrorism.
Look to our most innovative and forward leaning allies, Australia and the U.K. Their policy regimes tend to be reasonable and balanced, and the U.K. especially has been tempered through decades of encountering terrorism and outright insurgency. Also look to our adversaries -- they are constrained by few of the policy or legal boundaries we are, and every layer of red tape we add puts us at some level of disadvantage against increasingly aggressive hostile agencies in China, Russia, Iran, and so on. Accountability is laudable and necessary in a democracy, but Canada is far on the political left of this spectrum already. We need to be very cautious in adding bureaucracy without supplementing with additional capability.
I think that the questions are geared towards soliciting militant views. While Canada must take a stand against terrorism in all of its form we also have to remember the values on which our constitution are built on 
The most profoundly disturbing theme in the ACA was the elevation of interfering in Canada's economic profit to a terrorist act. This was a clear and shameless response to natives protesting impositions of the government's oil industry push. The government is an unworthy steward of our safety if it is going to use it as a smokescreen for an economic or social agenda. Protect our lives and our liberty.
From the questions asked and the presentation created, this "Green Paper" is anything but "green". It is an offensive document beginning with the first sentence that refers to "terrorism threats" that continues the myths and lies being pushed on Canadians by corporate and imperialist agents within government. The lie highlighted in the second section that "Canada is founded upon the rule of law.." sets the stage for continuing the destruction and exploitation of others to serve the greedy and privilege elite across the country. I have few illusions that this propaganda machine will do all it can to silence any dissension from their fear and hate message required to support their expensive machinery. I doubt that my contribution to this process will ever see the light of day as I read their so-called "Green Paper" that is really just another presentation from greedy, power hungry and very privileged folks who will do whatever it takes to protect their current positions and agendas.* are being forced to live in such a hate-filled society that this so-called "green paper" is presenting.
Any convicted terrorists should lose their claim to Canadian citizenship if they have dual citizenship. By threatening violence they must lose the rights of being Canadian citizens and should be deported. There should be major consequences for their decisions to harm Canadians that would serve as deterrent to other would be terrorists.  
Canada must return to its peace keeping rule in geopolitical world, keep a balanced approach to international conflicts and apply political pressure to countries violating human rights, like Israel and Saudi Arabia
I didn't read the green paper, maybe next time when I have time.
"Here is some notes just so it is clear..  Privacy.. In marriage act financial matters are 50/50 but even banks are not obligated to tell the spouse about what they are doing..  Criminal acts could happen and the other has no clue and not aware there for this makes impossible to know if one is financing a criminal activity..  Open the marriage laws so that banks if they know the other has married partner they are obligated to disclose to the other when asked..  bylaw.

This break may just open up and reduce and close down terrorist acts and where females are protected and or males.. both can play role so it is not exclusive to male only.. Gender aside. 

This is not violation of Marriage act which means allot and will strengthen the marriage.   also one will leak at some point.  Next when it comes to other aspects that are needed the privacy act should never cross the bedroom but yeah there needs to be ways to open up security on phones by making a IT or Computer law about security on devices when request there is a backdoor known to and for the police to use on anything used in canada.   It can be a add on app or embedded but no one has the right to privacy above the law.   NO One.   Now if any body leaks the key to that.. yeah well prison for life is not a good thing.  Human rights is still in the charter and should be protected at all cost.  however once one is tried and convicted in court of law.. well we still need to provide those rights while freedom is denied during the time specified by the courts. 

As to deny travel or other aspects if it clear they are leaving to train to build make or do a terrorist act then that is one thing.. But we are all free to leave the country as the charter says.. so how to enforce this is to know that people who leave and proof of attending of such activities would result in peace bond. but let's not do it on he or she might.. could maybe..  There has to be solid proof and presented to the courts where the justice would then approve a corrective action to detain and the person would have the right to challenge and have counter hearing after the fact.   The original hearing may take place before entering into Canada at which point they would be pick up at the airport and detained knowing why they are.  This way they can show and provide evidence of where and what they did.. Just in case it was wrong person and miss communication.  Fair hearings are must if detention is going to be done. 
I feel like terrorism coming from the middle east right now is an exisistential threat to western societies. But I believe the battle is winnable. We should do our best as canada to be diplomatic with how we deal with it... we need to be smart... we don't want our actions today creating enemies in the future. We want our actions today to result in allies in the future... instead of sending boots on the ground, send resources like food and water and supplies with a big Canadian maple leaf on it to those civilians stuck in these battlegrounds. We need more friends, not more enemies. Diplomatic negotiations with the sovereign governments in the region are a different story. At least help the people. This is what canada is supposed to be about.
The elimination of poverty and the lower class, would certainly be one way to show/prove to people and other countries that a fair and equitable life is available, that terrorism cannot grow/develop/flourish in a country where every person is treated equally and equitably.
The paper didn't address how to more effectively utilise public schools to indoctrinate children into the state. 
I think its important that we do not allow radical Islam to stomp all over are beliefs in Canada.  Radical Islam must be removed from Canada.  It is important that we do not lose are identity as Canadians and show strength against this threat.   We must be careful as to many accommodations can lead to further erosion of what made Canada great in the first place.

Do your job would be a great start. The politicians line their pockets with our hard earned tax dollars, that they give away to foreign countries whilst half of us Canadians STARVE, just so the Trudeau Regime can look good on the world stage, and now we are spending more money because the lying, self serving politicians cannot even earn their keep...pathetic!!!!!!
The government should stop choosing companies to support.  Taxes or disincentives for bad behaviour is var more effective and less descriminatory.
"Give us the right to protect ourselves. The criminals have more protection than the victims! This isn't a justice system nor a legal system. 

Stop protecting criminals and protect the good people of this country!"
Increase police presence in high crime areas even if there are accusations of racism as a result. Fear of being called racist leads to a great disservice to law abiding citizens. Safety of Canadians comes before all else. 
"I have this Idea that might solve Some of the Islamic problem and I hope that the government thinks about it.....lots of the radical Muslims or Salafists do not like to live the western modern life and they will not change....Think of these people as the ""Amish"" of the Muslim world.... So I think there is 2 solutions: Create areas where rich Muslims can buy lands and create villages for people who wants to live like the Amish......Or ask politely every Muslim family or individuals who prefer to live like that to go back to the middle east.....Putting some radical Muslims in jail or preventing them from traveling is not a long term solution.
"Going soft and only reacting after a terrorist action in Canada will never protect Canadians.   
All efforts must be made to identify threats and use every tool possible to eliminate the threat.  Allowing one Canadian to be hurt or killed by someone who wishes to harm Canada is a horrific and tragic failure of law enforcement and government to protect Canadians.  The priority should always be to protect us all first which includes those who wish to do us harm.  Interventions early will not only protect Canadians but also those Canadians or Foreign Nationals who wish to do us harm and hopefully stop the idealism/radicalization.  If the radicalization cannot be stopped then incarceration or deportation should be done."
"Take another look at what Mahatma Gandhi says about not being defeated even if he were beaten up and killed.  We need to tell the terrorist criminals the same thing as Gandhi.  By not reacting violently Gandhi freed India and Pakistan from the British Empire.  By not reacting violently, Martin Luther King Jr. defeated racial segregation in the U.S.  Our government should learn how to do such great things and make them the centre of our anti-terror laws.

Our ancestors did not fight Nazis and Fascists from 1939 to 1945, and tens of millions did not die in that fight so that we could have ""security"" laws, policies, and procedures that would make such terrible enemies feel that they had finally won the war.

We have already had the smiles wiped off our faces in Canadian passports.  We now look like very grim and unhappy people, almost like the faces of mug shots in the jail system.  This should not be our goal as a country.  The technology is so poor that it can't distinguish between faces that look happy?  Why let the terrorists wipe the smiles off our faces?
Make peace, not war. Stop ignorantly claiming terrorists are simply unstable losers, and start accepting some responsibility and blame. Create hope. There are other ways to sustain an economy other than military manufacturing. Then there will be no terrorism in Canada. 
"More gov funded education for students and researchers in radicalization and terrorism 

Agency other the the RCMP and CSIS to investigate and coordinate possible subjects   "
"I'm not so concerned with terrorists as I am disappointed that so many Canadians seem to think it's OK to steal works of art.

I would be happy to see bill C-51 used to identify and fine individuals who misuse our communications network, in a grand-scale way. Anyone holding over 10,000+ stolen works of music or 1,000+  films ought be fined no less than $1,000. All funds acquired from these criminals ought then be put in an account, set-aside for grants for artists."
I think it is time to make policy changes regarding national security issues. Just by making surveillance for the most innocent journalists and writers we can make no difference. We are just adding more complicated problem instead of bringing solutions. So the most important thing is we have to respect our constitution and our Charter of rights and freedoms. All laws should be originated from our constitution. Any law, that is contrary to our constitution and and Charter shouldn't have the power of enforcement. Law makers and policy makers should think twice before making laws and policies. We have to be part of the solution instead of making unlimited complicating problems. I would like to see a better future in a very near future. Thank you!
Canadians do not need to live in or embrace a culture of fear and hate.  Relationship building at all levels of all governments need to be co-ordinated and all voices need to be heard.  That also means that all major religious and cultural events needed to be celebrated!  Christmas needs to be celebrated in schools as Christmas and Muharram needs to be celebrated as New Year as does Rosh Hashanah and Diwali.  Celebrating as a community builds respect and trust.  
"Again with steering the conversation away from privacy and freedom of expression.
Scrap the whole thing. Canada's national security institutions needed better inter-agency communication. The rest is beyond the pale, and far too easy to abuse."
Since 2015, the upward spiral of terrorist activities in Europe tells me that Canada should react on annual basis to ensure we are not out flanked by the extremists.
"do what is right with the ata, are you people that stupid that you can't figure out  how to control terrorism in Canada?
I'll say this; do not bring in any more migrants, they just cause trouble. "
Laws need to be reviewed every so often to make sure that they are inline with the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, as well as to ensure that such measures are working. This is what the sunset clause is for. 
"A statutory review of the ATA after three years is sufficient; granted the concurrent situation of national security matters from the eyes of the public at the time of this online consultation having been initiated.
However further investigations into such matters could implicate the possibility of a more extensive review into the ATA and related conduct by government officials and agents."
Periodic reviews are always necessary as security threats are continually changing and a three year review should be the maximum timeframe for the review to take place.
This seems reasonable, the government should make clear what this review will entail.
I'm not comfortable relying on Parliament.  Parliament can change in a few years.  These responsibilities need to be permanent.  
Maybe real time monitoring or "editing to camera". That is : how movies are edited after each day, rather than editing a mountain of film after filming is stopped.
For TRUDEAU to wake up and bringing in all these refugees that are ANTI-CANADIAN and will not conform. That Muslim religion is NOT A RELIGION when you have their so called BIBLE ( THE QURAN ) when there is OVER 200 HUNDRED PASSAGES IN THAT TEXT THAT STRESS * HATE* AGAINST JEWS, Catholics, Christians, etc, etc.......and all infidels.   Canada NEED NOT RECOGNIZE RELIGIOUS TEXT THAT VIOLATES CANADIAN CHARTER OF RIGHTS AND RIGHT TO LIFE AND LIBERTY !!! 
3 years is too long. I would half that.
The statutory review should be carried out by the Supreme Court at least once every five years and should also be automatically triggered by any event, litigation or prosecution which uncovers any significant issue with any provision of the ATA.  The Supreme Court may then use it's authority to compel  adjustment or abolishment of any provision; but it may only propose for consideration new or novel provisions it finds advisable.
Yes, this is a lot of power that could be abused or used in other ways than its intended purpose to control our citizens.
The Charter protects us again net unlawful prosecution and impact to our liberties. This said, CANADIAN "agencies" require access to "restricted" data for "Terrorism" enforcement....but only this and not extended to any other areas without complete disclosure. Othe country's agencies should not be permitted to raw data on Canadians.
should be every 3 years, with a mandatory completion date no more than six months after review is initiated.
Yes, any parliamentarian who is shown to have contributed to the weakening of our privacy protections should be immediately expelled from parliament and face jail time.
The review should be conducted at regular intervals, not just the initial time.
The extent of the review needs to be well defined.  Technically, reading it over and checking for spelling mistakes could count as a review, but would hardly satisfy the needs of the public.  The changes proposed upon review must be both assessed by an independent third party AND go back to parliament for ratification, or there is the risk that further restrictions to individuals rights and freedoms will be made over time in a creeping way, one small change at a time... And then before we know it we're all living in a George Orwell novel.  
The Anti-Terrorism Act (Bill C-51) should be rescinded as there are other laws already on-the-books that take care of anti-terrorist activity without the powers of Bill C-51 that have infringed on the rights of Canadian citizens without making Canadians safer.
The laws of this country apply to all citizens. Agencies do not have the right to trash citizens of this country. The laws of the country must even apply to agencies and politicians who abuse them.
There should be regular scheduled reviews.
No, increasing parliamentary oversight beyond that which already exists would only serve to handcuff our security agencies
"No. 

The legislation needs to be updated often and every three years is sufficient."
No.  Such a Sunset Review id sufficient - provided that there is not another Government like the previous one.
An outside body should be allowed to review national security activities. As long as those participating aren't a perceivable threat to national security and are thoroughly screened for links to any criminal or terrorist activities. 
to give a cogent report to our parliamentarians , yes , and from there on parliament must decide whether or not further review is required on the individual question .

I think Bill C-51 is fundamentally flawed and should be 100% repealed.  Most independent review bodies are not independent.
Adding more cooks to the kitchen doesn't make dinner better. Ensuring the existing review mechanisms are properly funded, properly staffed, and given appropriate access I would think is more effective than introducing new bodies. 	Again, will they have access to information? Is a committee of parliamentarians appropriate? Are they qualified? 
Anti-terrorism-act? Why three years? why not constant evalution? Why do we need an Anit-terrorism act? Does ATA not fall within regular justice, law enforcement and crime-prevention. Terrorism is a vague term selectively used to wrap and politicize criminal activity, why do we treat it specially and build laws around it. What's frightening about ATA is that is can supercede the laws of the land, rights and freedoms, and due process...prime example are security certificates. 
I say NO!  This is why such reviews take so long to complete and seems to be an ever ending debate.  Like the House of Commons and the Senate!  The "ping pong" effect!	No, CBSA, CSIS, RCMP and the Canadian Forces all already overly regulated by government and external review boards which only leads to backlog and delayed issues in National Security.
"Commissioner O'Connor is creating independent jobs and positions that will cause the taxpayers even more money that they already are overpaying to the Government of Canada. So my answer to this is an emphatic NO!
Heaven forbid that Canada becomes a country very much like Belgium and the Netherlands.  This is a very dark time all around the world with ethnics groups of non-birthed citizens of their new country wanting more autonomy for their religious beliefs and culture.  I for one want to live in this great country * but I'm very afraid we are travelling down the wrong path.  
Information should be shared between review panels.
Yes. Especially any agency actively participating in a regulatory or enforcement role such as the CRA, CBSA and Corrections Services where national security responsibilities must be balanced against Charter rights and Freedoms.	Likely, yes, both would be needed. The independent review board could provide an objective assessment of national security activities across government to help inform and focus the parliamentary committee
I don't know. What I do know is that the Harper government attempted to govern by fear mongering and, even in a world increasingly violent, most Canadians didn't buy into that. I don't think we particularly need new submarines, helicopters and fighter jets. What we want are better roads, bridges, buses, ferries and airports. The RCMP, CSIS, and other agencies need to "get with the program".
A review should take place before each election and should involve a annual ongoing collection of data so this can be done in a quick and efficient manner.
Probably, but seriously we need here as well input from our legal system and also need a meta-body to constantly monitor and interface. 	Yes.  But independent must be independent and once again, must include legal input at as senior a level as possible.  
Yes.  Once again, because I do not want any security organizations making decisions and carrying out actions that are not within Canadian law or International Law and oversight must be provided by trusted meta-officials with no political connections.
Absolutely...however the tendency to get on a "witch hunt" and score political points seems at time to out way the  objective of reviews.
"The review could be within the organization. There should be a real review of refusals , detained ,and  deported individuals , the idea that an officer has this control is a bit scary....all major infractions should be reviewed by a well trained senior manger. I have little faith the agency has many such people, as there is little training, and the past few years has seen the retirement  of the most experience personnel with little thought to succession planning.
CBSA has added numbers to their ranks but most are in program and policy supporting directors instead of supporting front line staff with training a good decision making policies. Adding an independent review mechanisms will direct more monies from the away solving current efficiencies. "	No, yet another commission or review that cost taxpayers millions of dollars, that no government can actual action, since they take years to complete and government move on. 
A least parliamentarians are already being paid by the taxpayer, and they have a vested interest  to ensure the national security mandate is being followed.
No I don't believe they should be able to collaborate. Each review should be submitted separately. However in areas of national security different agencies should be collaborating if they have receive info that sends up red flags 
YES.  There should be an overall body responsible for overseeing national security across all departments and agencies.  This is the body who would look at the independent reviews of each agency and perform reviews across agencies with collaboration and input from the various agency review bodies.	YES other measures are needed such as a committee made up of the ministers responsible for national security and the members of the official opposition party who hold the position of shadow cabinet ministers for those ministers responsible for national security.  No other members of parliament who are not forming government or the official opposition would sit on this committee.
There needs to be less committees and there could be politically-motivated conflicts of interest with parliamentarians involved. Also,  I am not comfortable with Parliamentarians having access to national security activities.  
This is beginning to sound very Orwellian.  And I am certain there is financial cost as in salaries and benefits.  If the Conservatives manage to elect a competent new leader, the Liberals may be out the door next election.  You are behaving like royalty at times instead of public servants.That is too long. 
 There should be annual reviews to prevent wasting taxpayers and voters money on inefficiencies. 
Yes, they government is bloated and ripe for corruption, as is evident already.	Term limits for all government officials, including the life long bureucrats who just wait for their golden handshake.
Yes, give veto power to 12 civilians from each province and let them vote.  The government must represent the people and oversight should be by the people.
How can a review happen by government?  Elections, and a constantly changing set of ministers will guarantee there is no such thing as independent review.
There should be a very small independent review body and no committee of parliamentarians. Perhaps a couple of senators could be on the review body.
No.  The accountability already in place may already be a bit of over-kill.
Firstly we must deal with the Fact that Terrorist are planning on KILLING many Canadians.Yet we as a Government seem to be more concerned about the RIGHTS of the people planning to KILL CANADIANS then we are about the Safety of our Citizens.?????  Yet we seem to want to HANDCUFF the Agencys that are trying to Protect Us......That makes No Sense to anybody..Let me try and understand this....a Terrorist can Murder 300 people but if the i,s aren,t dottied and the T,s aren,t crossed then the Terrorists Rights weren,t respected ?????? Hug A Thug ??? Fundamentlely Wrong...Period Convict,Prison and revoke Citizenship PERIOD!!!!! Rehabilitate is out the window,,,,,	Recognize and treat TERRORISM for what it is and stop this Hug A Thug approach.
The ultimate objective would be to prevent any terror acts as well as preventing alien third world cultures and traditions to penetrate this land or convert our youth to jihadis. This should be the prime responsibility in addition to converting to an alien and Stone Age religion and culture
it should be repealed. current laws already adequately address almost all its concerns, and the little that remains should be addressed via new, and carefully thought-out legislation that protects the rights of Canadians.
Any measures that would be required to ensure those parliamentarians are accountable should be carried out.
In order to have a review of the statute, it has to be determined what has or has not been done using the powers available in the act. The effectiveness of the legislation as it exists can only be measured when compared to the goals set out before the act was written, positive achievements or opportunities lost resulting in a loss of public safety. These results have to be gathered without suffering the various types of spin seen from ambition, politics or perhaps incompetence. This means getting results, findings, methods and so forth from the front line operators and supervisors using the act. Of course this is information that cannot be provided in a public forum but should be gathered from those who should be speaking, not just authorized to speak. A non-partisan committee small enough to work quickly but empowered to speak to investigators at any level would be able to provide specifics for the statutory review committee\ Parliament who also have the ability to subpoena witnesses. To put it plainly, meaningful change does not occur when high level managers control the message reported to legislators.  
A statutory review is a good start but then the Government must act on the recommendations and not simply shelve the report.
I don't understand the question, mainly because I am unfamiliar with the legislation. I think this is a problem with our society, we fail to educate citizens on new and old legislation.
If there are any problems with the legislation parliamentarians can always take a look but the three year review allows for other work to be scrutinized and there is no requirement for constant review, since these public consultations and the work of those oversight committees in ongoing, with respect to public scrutiny by the press and investigative reporters whose work brings to light any new issues or concerns through the ongoing works of many agencies. You know who I am through my email address, internet protocol and so on but this is also secret information or not so secret anymore, right?
Yes, wherever any body has extraordinary powers, review is essential to prevent excessive use or going beyond what is authorized. We should recognize that officers of such agencies are often under pressure to get results that may lead to bending or breaking of constraints.
Yes. Parliamentarians are the representatives of the people and therefore should be the final authority in these matters, but they do not necessarily have the expertise to investigate more deeply.. The independent review body should be made up of experts in the field who should prepare reports for the advice of the parliamentary committee. 
Yes, the provision of reports as to the effectiveness of the measures within the ATA, prepared by the review bodies, with as much information (especially statistical) as can be provided without jeopardizing national security.
More government literacy, there needs to be larger initiatives to embed in education system. In high school we had only 1/2 term to teach us about government. We had little idea how it worked, what/how departments collect information
Invest and deliver into public service data literacy and privacy initiatives
Improve internet access in rurual/remote communities
Make info accessible / sharing. Intranet access - rural, city?
Get feedback from potential and current users
Engaging academia / private sector through public consultations. Crowd sourcing.
"Bring in users of government information / data to communicate value directly to staff - showcase.
Policy development on github? Would be coold for legislation too! Allows to see changes over time."
interconnectivity with other levels of government and private industry
Open "corporate repositories" online
collaboration, available funding
Focus on business outcomes first (what's in it for me?)
Interconnected access to data and federal information with municipal and provincial levels. 
One location where the data / information can be found rather than department / department to find what you are looking for.
cant read this
open departmental GCDocs libraries
Creating a central open government repository that has a very long retention period.
I'd love a governement-esque list of types of documents that could fall under open government. Not necessarily comprehensive but a starting point. 
Documents should be classified for release (including potential ATIA redaction) at the time that they are created. * Major plain language push!
Release info that is being ATIP'd every day to save departments effort and time
How can we benefit the everyday citizen in terms of access to their information
publish, publish, publish
Publish more data and information! 
change management to help move culture to be open by default
Make outlook calendars open by default
Keep it simple - keep the plan simple (easily understood language). 
Publish government processes where appropriate
Open source tech, or some public site or drive where policies, standards, directives, etc. of all groups can be made public (first stop and easiest).
Searchability and filtering (like Excel?)
Describe benefits and intentions clearly. Tie it to cost savings / service improvements.
Make it "google" able. Understanding that the data is there you just need to search. Then collecting the search terms and using metadata to translate between government and public.
Increase document availability for the public
advertising the availability of data
Increased use of social media and the internet to distribute everything: data / information / open government 
Clearer guidelines of what ought to be included given to departments
Having a consistent, standardized EDRMS MANDATORY for all GoC departments with integrated publishing to enable open by default.
Centre of Excellence for Open Governmetn 
engage citizens on what they want
lead by providing bundles. Home, environment, neighbourhood: if people see useful info they will ask for more
More education and awareness at all levels - proof that it is useful. 
Statscan has a learning toolkit for students and teachers. Perhaps repackaging that for use of data/analytics or emulating for broader education on open gov
Connect with NRCan (GeoConnections)
Work together at all levels of government 
Eat your own dog food government - develop policy based on collaboration. 
Analyse current status / maturity model pragmatically i.e. staying on message is important (collaborative, public engagement) but reality is that is not the case. Need better analysis to shape actions. 
establishing metadata standards across jurisdictions in Canada that are interoperable with international standards
connecting the info/data between department over time 
We have been using faulty logic and assumptions. Our perceived fears and reality do not match. Our behaviour is driven by outdated beliefs. 
Culture change and change the relationship with government
Crowd source citizen data
Citizen participation in data -- crowd sourcing. Engaging relevant groups on relevant topics (i.e. groups passionate about water quality to contribute ideas on what open wg data should look like)
Seek out mechanisms that allow us to realize the latent value of information we hold. 
Consistency of data/standards, digital literacy to make it understandable
Common data structures
Find out what we actually share  relatively immediately and demonstrate its worth
Accept more low level risk
Pro actively prepare and offer info packages to allow for more enlightened public (participation). 
Understanding raw data is not for everyone; let people contribute visualisation; be open to new means to translate the raw data into meaningful information for everyone.
Donner le sentiment aux citoyens quils sont interpells. RT: Give citizens the feeling that they have been consulted on this process/ called out to for feedback.
Outils de visualisation des donnes. (VR) RT: Tools for data display/ data viewing.
User Committee to help dept. define fields that need to be captured from the get go (eg. design data capture with help of community).
Work on structure and method behind data, so that its useful.
Force data plans from all dept., like granting councils already do. Force data to be captured by census area.
Be clear about degree of rigor in data: a place for open info (docs and text) and one for data, which is separated between master data (validated) and transitory data (raw, unvalidated).
Put experts in contact with department specialists.
Think about ways to have citizen benefit from public investments in technology. Communicate investments in data or research to share and ensure no overlap/waste, internal or external to government. 
An online platform that moves beyond surveys.
More promotion and communication
Science integrity policies which lay out procedures for government scientists and researchers to speak on their research to the public.
Good first step with spreadsheet announcement.
Parliament endorse the Declaration on Parliamentary Openness and commit to culture change in parliament as well. Create a tool to improve effectiveness of budgetary oversight by parliament.
Data I want button on each department website with voting-- get at questions lots of people ask.
Turning crown copyright into open by default, like US government public domain.
Top down, link open data to performance management.
Make information/ data that is not confidential readily available.
Releasing data so that it is masked with variables that allow data to be aggregated in a way that allow people to find themselves (e.g. demography, age, geography).
Release all the data and information: elimate all FOIA Department. Easy to use, searchable database of all public documents across departments.
Build frameworks that allow the collection and release process to be open and consultative.
Participation Research
Civil jury
Proactive education about how government works and who to go to with ideas and questions
Use Consensys (Blockchain production studio) 
Create a challenge issued to 16-24 year olds across the country that deals with a social issue and hold an event to listen to and explore the solutions they come up with. You could also have a prize for the most creative and practical solution.
Platforms that facilitate engagement and problem solving.
Citizen's assemblies. Consultative budgeting.
Enforce rules about municipal departments releasing data (mandate them).
Having a (well marketed) platform and easy acccesible forum/ platform that can allow for efficient feedback and response times.
Hold government accountable to response time for public. Make public government representatives at international forums so civil society know who to contact
a platform (online) dedicated to contact between politicians and citizens
When databases are originally built to look at the various other purposes and record additional data.
Implement high touch personal connectors to scan what's out there
Have the folks in Sherbrooke play a role in standards pertaining to addresses, sites etc. at the national and international level, working with all levels of government in Canada.
Work more with municipalities (where most of citizens are and where most of users are.
Inform=wholesome views of information. Improve= consolidate and clean data. Involve= cross jurisdiction and persons manipulating data.
To create standard template to create/ share Open Data (e.g. top 10-20 datasets that are published by municipalities across Canada currently and standardize template). To help remaining municipalities open their data. Also, templates- take to Council for approval at open data sites.
Great open data standards/ templates for all levels of government.
Cut through levels of government.
Release postal code locations. Useful in apps to get approximate user location.
Open data by default-- for all new data collected, proactive release. Also, resolve the lack of this concerning FACTS.
Use tools like Socrata to identify who has open data.
Create a process where data is open faster through removing, be default, PIA data.
Use federal role to develop data standards for interchange.
How to not duplicate the EMR problem or dispense data/systems/ process.
Let the ground-level workers talk more, not just the press releases.
Offer training on data interpretation. 
Provide online tools / resources (something similar to BC Gov's UX toolkit).
Partnership-- real partnership.
Provide data sets in a centralized (easily searchable) repository along with tools to help citizens interpret data.
Identify, develop and share tools for open data with other levels of government. Maintain a culture of open government regardless of changes in political leadership.
Tools connecting all governments.
Having information easily accessible but also in an organized manner.
Rendre public ce que est dj dans des systmes informatiques (les solutions et contributions). RT: Make public what is already in information systems (solutions and contributions).
Continue to work on a culture of openness.
Change culture.
Compel bureaucrats to publish data.
Disclose what doesn't need to be kept secret.
Help overcome the culture of fear about making data and information open.
Need the background behind the data criteria.
Default is that data will be open prior to collection.
Use blockchain as a means of verifying the pedigree of datasets
"We need all government areas to be accountable to the public . Too many offices and not enough listening to people's concerns . Government seems to believe they get a free ride on tax payers money . Cut backs need to be made , less paying themselves first and more looking out for the people .
Governments have lost all common sense , we are experiencing this first hand in dealing with a environment issue . We have been treated very poorly , when if common sense prevailed the situation could have been corrected .
Government has lost all respect for the people and this country is beginning to show the affects . 
What ever happened to honesty and dedication , instead of this multiple greedy attitude ."
"It is important in the world of government programs to have accountable program managers who understand the outcomes they are trying to achieve and the performance measures necessary to effectively evaluate program performance.

This is not the situation and too often the performance measures are whatever makes the Minister look good. Program evaluation needs to be a strong  foundation for democratic societies.

I would like to see a working  group discuss developing this senior executive capacity and instantiating a more coherent governance model that brings out the best in politicians, senior bureaucrats, and builds a motivated, innovative work force.
"
An expectation/requirement that public sector agencies must document transactions and the decision making processes that occur.  Meetings that have no minutes, approvals/direction given orally, rationales for decisions not documented all add up to an unaccountable, inscrutable government.
To add to this idea, see the Duty to document section of this recent report by the Information Commissioner, on pages 14-15 (pages 18-19 of the PDF). The Commissioner recommends "establishing a comprehensive legal duty to document, with appropriate sanctions for non-compliance." http://www.oic-ci.gc.ca/eng/rapport-de-modernisation-modernization-repor...
Add a free, open response, web service to the Open Government Portal that takes a postal code and returns a representative location (e.g., geographic coordinates). Such a service is useful to websites and applications that ask for a user's postal code as a surrogate for their location. Open response means all web service responses are licensed under the Open Government License.
"Many of the issues with the ATI process that are mentioned in the media can be explained in whole or in part by the incentives that the current ATIP process and system creates for public servants. No matter how fervent a believer in open government, receiving an ATI request is a painful experience. The amount of labour involved in understanding and clarifying the request, searching records and reviewing the resulting records for release is impossible to overstate. The real effort costs are usually many times higher even than the official reporting forms, at least in my experience, because no one is willing to acknowledge the true time and effort requirements to sort through the equivalent of many thousands of pages of potential documents for each request. Given this process, it's no wonder that records are not kept or not thoroughly searched since this could easily result in no time remaining for any other work.
 For any future ATI system to succeed will need buy-in from those implementing the system and that will require the development of a dramatically less labour-intensive process. Are there ways to automate processes? Can employee involvement be limited to review?
 Given the dramatically declining cost of computer storage, would it be possible for all email records to be automatically copied without human intervention to a giant database. Any incoming ATI request would be treated by the ATI office as a keyword search similar to google. These requests would automatically search all electronic resources (email, GCdocs, public websites, shared network drives) and manual searches of paper records would only be done when explicitly requested, thus removing the need for the requester to understand government filing systems. This kind of automation would reduce search time and time interpreting requests to zero. It would eliminate the risk of some people doing more or less thorough searches than others. I don't think it would be possible to eliminate the review process, but it should be made possible for this system to identify the originator of a given record and automatically send them the documents to review and to mark up any areas that are suggested not to be released online and to automate as much as possible of the ATIP office review process and to automatically track service standards and deadlines.
Maybe there are less technology-heavy and more administrative means to accomplish the same goals, but unless the labour impact of ATI requests on typical civil servants is addressed in some manner, any increase in ATI numbers will result in less and less timely results and the negative productivity impact of the time spent processing these requests will only increase."
"The Government of Canada should adopt a procurement model that recognizes that complex problems or technological needs are rarely fully understood until organizations start experimenting with solutions, and that writing full requirements before engaging with solutions providers is incredibly limiting. This hampers government's ability to bring external expertise into problem-solving.
I note and applaud the government efforts to crack down on tax evasion as well as global discussions for governments to work together to eliminate transnational tax evasion through such means as offshore tax havens. We cannot do this alone. Key deliverable within two years: develop an action plan to end offshore tax evasion to bring to the open government partnership for their consideration, as well as to include in trade treaty negotiations, i.e. to enjoy trade benefits governments should take action in this area.
I fully agree with James' proposal. I think this information should be open and freely available. The Inter-corporate Ownership (61-517-X) database contains information about "who owns what" in Canada. The data is quite detailed and reaches back quite some time (I believe the initial version of the product dates from the 80s and perhaps even the 1970s.) From the Statistics Canada product page: From: http://www5.statcan.gc.ca/olc-cel/olc.action?objId=61-517-X&objType=2&la... "The Inter-corporate ownership product is the most authoritative and comprehensive source of information available on corporate ownership; a unique directory of "who owns what" in Canada. It provides up-to-date information reflecting recent corporate takeovers and other substantial changes. Ultimate corporate control is determined through a careful study of holdings by corporations, the effects of options, insider holdings, convertible shares and interlocking directorships. The number of corporations that make up the hierarchy of structures totals approximately 45,000. The information that is presented is based on non-confidential returns filed by Canadian corporations under the Corporations Returns Act and on research using public sources such as internet sites.

We support action on beneficial ownership as part of Canada's Open Government Action Plan. This is an area where Canada falls behind many other countries and is not compliant with new international standards of transparency. The ease with which it is possible to register shell companies in Canada and the lack of verification and updating of information by many provincial and territorial governments provides opportunities for tax evaders and money launderers to commit crimes. 
Effective international action to fight tax havens requires that all countries adopt high standards of transparency. It is also very important that there be public registries of corporate registrations. This would benefit businesses in terms of being able to verify beneficial ownership of clients or potential business partnerships as well as boost public accountability.
At the London 2016 Anti-Corruption Summit: "France, the Netherlands, Nigeria and Afghanistan will follow the UKs lead and commit to launch their own public registers of true company ownership, while Australia, New Zealand, Jordan, Indonesia, Ireland and Georgia will agree to take the initial steps towards making similar arrangements. The UK will launch its own fully public register next month  the first G20 country to do so." https://www.gov.uk/government/news/pm-announces-new-global-commitments-t...
The reportedly leaked documents from a Panamanian based law firm, colloquially described as the Panama Papers, highlight a broader issue of the global financial system being abused for illicit purposes such as tax evasion and money laundering, and the pressing need for the Government of Canada to take concrete steps to address the ability of some Canadians to shield themselves, and their financial activities, from Canadian authorities.   That some can rig the system to hide their wealth, whether amassed legally or not, is not merely unjust; it also masks corruption and harms global development by siphoning off revenues that could be directed to education, health care and infrastructure. Despite repeated promises at the international level to address company secrecy, Transparency International recently evaluated different G20 member states beneficial ownership transparency legal framework and ranked Canada as having a weak framework. This is in contrast to the UK, which was given the ranking very strong. Offshore banking is not in itself illegal, and those named should not be presumed to have done anything wrong.  However, secrecy attracts those with something to hide, making beneficial ownership transparency an issue of global importance.   In light of this, and in the run up to the global anti-corruption summit, which will take place in London on May 12th, Transparency International Canada calls upon the Government of Canada to commit to the establishment of a mandatory public registry of all companies and trusts registered in Canada. This registry will shed light on the legal and effective owners of Canadian registered companies.   Public registers of beneficial ownership allow ill-gotten gains to be more easily traced, making it more difficult and less attractive for people to benefit from the proceeds of crime.  They also make it easier for financial institutions and law enforcement officials, amongst others, to quickly, and without additional cost, ascertain information about the legal and effective owners of companies and trusts. The Government of Canada has committed itself to combat the flow of proceeds of foreign corruption into Canada.  Creating a public registry system would be a necessary step to uphold such a commitment.  To ensure an effective registration system, TI Canada urges the Government of Canada to work with provinces to ensure similar legislation is passed in all jurisdictions.
I support Transparency International Canada's submission on Beneficial Ownership Transparency. As a resident of the Vancouver area, I am particularly concerned about the lack of transparency in recent major real estate transactions. Creating effective public registers of beneficial ownership will be an important first step towards enhancing transparency.
Anonymous shell companies play a central role in laundering and channeling funds, concealing behind a veil of secrecy the identity of corrupt individuals and irresponsible businesses involved in criminal activities, including tax evasion, terrorist financing, and the trafficking of drugs and people. This robs governments, in both developed and developing countries, of resources that might otherwise be invested in improving public services and stimulating inclusive economic growth.  The legitimacy afforded to shady shell companies registered in well-respected places like Canada makes it easy for them to open bank accounts that can wire ill-gotten money anywhere in the world. In far too many cases, this tactic has been used to rob developing countries of the resources they need to invest in health, agriculture, and poverty reduction. In addition, they exacerbate governance problems and undermine the prospects for investment and growth. This risks undercutting the billions of dollars the Government of Canada spends each year on overseas development assistance to help developing countries become more prosperous and secure.  We therefore urge the Government of Canada to increase the transparency of anonymous shell companies by committing to implement public, centralized registers of beneficial ownership information.
This is a very important initiative. To look at it another way, how is it that anonymous ownership is even legal in the first place? The risk of abuse is so obvious and apparent.
Canada is currently involved in the Anti Corruption Summit. Conversely, Canada is one of the easiest places in the world to create anonymous shell companies. For the Canadian government to be taken seriously that it is committed to combat tax avoidance, tax evasion, money laundering and corruption, it must end anonymous ownership, and commit to public, centralized registers of beneficial ownership.
I completely embrace TI's outstanding work in contributing this and the companion issue of whistle blower protections to the federal government for use in its deliberations. I urge the government to follow TI''s recommendations.
I fully support the proposals for action on beneficial ownership, the creation of a registry and its close monitoring as very important to greater transparency in all transactions.
Canada should aim to lead on beneficial ownership transparency. Not only is it the right thing to do, without transparency being achieved globally, responsible Canadian firms across all sectors will be at a competitive disadvantage to firms based in countries with problematic laws. Canada needs to set a strong example so it can help push all countries in the world to have an level playing field, which will in the long term help Canada's companies.
Hard to see what any legitimate business would have against a Global Beneficial Ownership Register (GBOR) like proposed here 
"Anonymous shell companies are the vehicle of choice for corruption, criminal enterprises, and corporate tax evasion and avoidance. Even folks in the private sector agree there's no good reason to have one. It would be a great step to make the rules of the global economy fairer for everyone, fight crime from terrorism to human trafficking, and make it harder for government officials to engage in corruption. Everyone wins!
You can learn more about our views on beneficial ownership transparency 
"SeeClickFix is a mobile, citizen reporting tool that has been readily and successfully adopted in 260+ cities across America. In addition, 10+ cities in Canada have already signed up  showing that there is a growing movement around this tool that empowers citizens to engage with their governments.
gov.seeclickfix.com"
This sounds like a good idea!
PlaceSpeak.com, developed to PrivacyByDesign standards by Vancouver company, should be used to connect Canadians to all 4 levels of government and to connect communities and streets. Citizens interested in all forms of civic engagement at all 4 levels need to be able to discuss issues, polls, etc leading to input to help improve government. MobilePD can integrate with seeclickfix to help make communities safer, healthier and more vibrant.
This could also apply to our digital world. If an end user notices a typo in an official communication, or a ceiling tile about to fall off, or even a web service misbehaving, this SeeClickFix approach could be just another event source driving corrective actions.
Hi Karin, I am looking for any statistical information concerning the use of government online services. Something like this but more contemporary: 
Thanks for getting back to me Kent. You may be the wrong person to ask, but do you know where I could find statistical information regarding the uptake of online services in Canada?? Statistics Canada doesn't have reliable information going past 2009 (for most things...) and this information would really help my research. I understand if this is not in your purview :) Thanks.
I am writing a paper on Electronic Government in Canada and it has come to my attention that Canada is lagging far behind other developed countries when it comes to e-participation via e-consulting and e-decision making (15th according to United Nations E-government Survey 2014). I am wondering about this stated deliverable: "Develop and launch a new government-wide consultation portal to promote opportunities for public participation, host online consultations, and share findings from completed consultations." Has this been launched? Is it referring to this.
To actively participate in democratic processes, citizens need to feel reasonably secure in doing so. Public protest, critique, and active engagement in public consultation needs to be seen not only as a right, but a responsibility. Employers and employees need to see civic engagement as a public service. True open dialogue is a potential with the internet, but achieving this will require the development of a society-wide support for strong (but respectful, in my opinion) intellectual freedom. This will not happen overnight or in the next couple of years. What is realistic in the short term is to begin the process of public dialogue / consultation on this topic. For example, this would need to be part of the education process, which requires consultation with provinces since education is a provincial responsibility. Putting this on the agenda for a meeting with premiers and internationally with the open government partnership strikes me as a reasonable short-term goal.
Please see my previous input on PlaceSpeak.com.  It meets all of the privacybydesign requirements and currently has governments at all 4 levels using it as well as community groups. It is a Canadian product and can be helping more of Canada at all 4 levels now.  
"I would suggest a good way of ensuring open government is to govern openly. Take for example cannabis, your party promised to legalize it, but 6 months later have said nothing about your plan, leaving Canadians completely in the dark and creating unnecessary and unhelpful confusion and ambiguity. Another example is the TPP. Again, all we hear is that Ms. Freeland is consulting, but we don't know who and we don't know anything else about your government's position on the TPP. 
 If your party is serious about openness, these examples don't really demonstrate that. It isn't particularly complicated; if you want to be open and transparent, then JUST BE OPEN AND TRANSPARENT. It really is pretty straight forward."
I agree that 'a good way of ensuring open government is to govern openly' but I'm not convinced that the cannabis and TPP issues are necessarily good examples of not doing so. However, forbidding the Parliamentary Budget Office from releasing five-year taxation and spending plans that were not considered confidential by the previous government (as described by Michael Den Tandt in the Montreal Gazette of 2016 Apr 8) seems to be a large step away from open government.
"Dear average taxpayer:
 We have completed an examination of your tax filings for the last three years and we wish to inform you that you have been reassessed and now owe us $2,192.63. You erroneously claimed undocumented charitable contributions totaling $756.45 on line 349 for the years 2012-2014 and unsupported medical claims of $1,090.16 on line 332 for the same period. 
 Furthermore, you failed to claim capital gains on some of your meager investments and we have assessed you an additional $759.23 for tax owing. If you require a more detailed explanation for these charges, why don't you hire an accountant? You can continue to try doing your taxes on your own but don't blame us when we nail you for even more owing.
 Included within these charges are penalties and accumulated interest for the three-year period under investigation. Plus, if you don't cough up what you owe within 30 days, we're going to start charging you interest at what some might call a usurious rate.
 Our suggestion to you is to pay as soon as you can or we can't promise what action will be taken next. While it's true we can't put you in prison, we can make your life a living hell for as long as necessary.
Dear valued wealthy client:
 First, we'd like to apologize for corresponding with you directly. We know that you prefer that we communicate with you through your accountants or your esteemed team of corporate tax lawyers. However, in this case, we were obliged to contact you directly.
 We almost hate to bring it up seeing as how the matter is so trivial but the law is the law, as they say (or at least as most Canadians say). It's just that one of our overzealous auditors happened to notice that you didn't declare income from money you've been holding in the Isle of Man for a number of years.
 We assume that this was an oversight and probably was due to questionable advice you may have obtained elsewhere. God knows, it's hard to keep track of income when it's in the eight or nine-figure range, or at least that's what we've been told by those in the know. So we can see how a few million here or a few million there might easily be overlooked.
 Sadly, however, it looks like there's some tax owing on the Isle of Man funds. Given that we were inexcusably tardy in bringing this matter to your attention, please take as long as you want to pay. And as for penalties and interest, just forget about it -- it's on us.
 Let's face it: neither of us wants a long, drawn-out court battle over this -- and anyway, only one of us can afford that. So pay what you can when you can and we'll call it even.
"Crowdsourcing/Open-sourcing conception and design of tangible money

Partners: Government of Canada, Minister of Finance, Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions (OSFI), Royal Canadian Mint, Canadian Bank Note Company, Civil Society.

TANGIBLY is a social innovation non profit national community organization established in Montreal in 2016 with a mission to enhance the social, cultural, territorial, economic and environmental well-being of communities around Canada through a nation wide Design Lab. It is specifically dedicated to taking immediate, positive and passionate action to pursue the goal of improving the social and psychological experience of the use of currency by citizens throughout the country with projects focused on exploring the potential of current and future conceptions, designs and productions of tangible money.

Money is generally known as a medium that can be exchanged for goods and services and is also used as a measure of value. Money can be divided into two types: tangible and intangible. Tangible is something that is real, capable of being touched, substantial and material. It is safe to assume that many things in our world revolve around money but now, it is time for money to revolve around every day citizens, and make changes in regular circulation currency that generates real and actual tangible benefits, rather than imaginary ones. Tangibly's mission is to empower Canadians, both men and women, to become civically engaged members of society and to participate in social innovation processes related to projects of enhanced collaborative conception and design of tangible money.

The Theory of Citizen Participation is at the core of our mission and it is to put citizens' input and participation, both men and women, and especially the youth of Canada, at the heart of ideas, designs and alternative practices for printed bank notes and minted coinage. The projects aim to unleash the human potential of the minds and hands of all citizens to enhance the experience of commerce and exchange when it comes to tangible money.
 It also aims to accelerate and optimize the use of high technology innovations in tangible money production processes with a purpose of exploring ways to foster social transformation. This reflects our desire to build a more meaningful and effective Canadian economy with definite impacts; not a vague or elusive proposition.

The main strategy is to enable the implementation of a pioneering design lab and social platform (Tangibly Design Lab) for national interactive dialogue and creation processes: from idea promotion to artistic contributions in the conception and design of printed bank notes and minted coinage. We work towards building a collaborative community in a decentralized, non-hierarchical way of working together that facilitates project-specific teamwork within a larger, ongoing and permanent national community. This socially innovative on-going national platform for the empowerment and achievement of individual contributors ( idea generators, artists, graphic designers, etc.) will allow us to empower citizens to seek the right information that will allow them to pursue innovative research and designs into the conception and design of tangible money. We also strive to build an equitable and inclusive social economy to ensure all Canadians, both men and women, have the opportunity to work and thrive.

We believe the social economy of Canada needs to be recognized worldwide for its ability to foster innovative solutions to economic disparity. We aim for a more just, prosperous and caring society through excellent research, effective networked collaboration and knowledge dissemination, and provide a valued neutral space within which an open dialogue among all interested parties can take place. We believe in using art for social change, to contribute significantly to the progress of a healthy democracy, by creating a sustainable sense of belonging to Canada and the power to produce tangible impacts. 
We are working on multi-sectoral partnerships that will allow for the tangible money of Canada to look like the innovations and new realities Canadians work so hard for, in order for these same Canadians to benefit from an immense increase in personal and psychological well-being. Improving the lives of Canadiansand contributing to a more resilient societyrequires breakthrough ideas and approaches, game changing strategies and collaborations, and continuous innovation.To bring these values and projects into actual physical existence, we envision multiple possible futures for tangible currency. 
This includes Provincial and Territorial Empowerment Initiatives, and increased and complete knowledge diffusion on the principles of bank note and minted currency conceptions, designs and productions processes. While focusing on identifying innovations that are scaleable and have deep impact to create a more financially resilient society, and a thriving more beautiful Canadian economy, our aim is to create the future of tangible money that will reflect Canadian society and innovations, along side values of economic rights and financial inclusion.
"You have a fair chunk of data from many sources it might be worth while to have a Data modeller look over the data but the complete task maybe to large.

You'd need to to to someone with some experience in this field to know if its worth while but if it is there are some very large potential savings to be found.

"Hello,
The budget released Tuesday March 22, indicates an increasing budget deficit.
   Please ensure that the right people know my serious reservations and concerns about this.  It is not responsible to spend more money than the government brings in.  It seems reckless to do so and stunts the long term prosperity and growth of the country.  This also sets a poor example for the country's citizens to follow.  Citizens, businesses and government should all attempt to manage their own finances wisely.  Despite the pain of not being able to afford something immediately it is better to spend when the money is there rather than to foster indebtedness.

Please, please spend our country's money wisely and frugally.  Please don't run a deficit.  We Canadians work hard to earn our money and try hard to live within our means.  It feels disrespectful that our nation not also strive to do the same in a display of solidarity with us.  Being fiscally prudent may not have much glitz and glamour but in the long term it will set up the country for even greater success.  Please could you pass along this note and sentiments within to the Finance Minister Bill Morneau and to Prime Minister Justin Trudeau?  I realize that I'm just one voice and I question what really 'one voice' can do.  But I believe that many many Canadians, regardless their political affiliation, would echo my thoughts.  Thank you.

30 Points on how to improve ATI. "
"The Government of Canada has an opportunity to use this OGP action plan to solve a concrete problem by developing and implementing a new Grants and Contributions (G&C) Data Standard to make improved G&C data available to citizens, the nonprofit sector, and public officials. Canada is already recognized internationally as a leader in the quality and availability of data about its nonprofit sector [1]. Improved G&Cs data will enable Canadians to better understand government spending to its nonprofit sector and to use that understanding to engage  in solution-finding in communities and to partner with government on social policy objectives.
The Proposal
G&Cs are the main ways that our government funds organizations in support of program objectives like community development, integration of refugees, or youth engaging in physical activity. The Directive on Open Government already compels departments to release grants & contributions programs data. However, it does not dictate a standard format for the data.
We propose that the Government of Canada include in its action plan a commitment to develop and implement a new standard for publishing G&C data. This will ensure that the information published is detailed and structured enough to be useful  for a wide variety of stakeholders and is interoperable with data from other departments and about other government expenditures (e.g. contracts). The design of that standard must be done with input from open data experts, policy makers, and nonprofit representatives.
The Need
Both the nonprofit sector and the federal government have clearly identified that more and better information about the sector, including its funding via G&Cs, is required for improved policy and decision-making. In 2003, the National Survey of Non-profit and Voluntary Organizations (NSNVO) [2] was initiated to meet that information need by collecting comprehensiveinformation about the breadth of Canadas nonprofit and voluntary sector, the types of organizations that make up the sector, and the areas in which they are active [3]. Unfortunately, this valuable survey was only conducted once.
A second example of a need for more G&C information was documented in the Independent Blue Ribbon Panel on Federal Grant and Contribution Programs, which was commissioned by the Treasury Board in 2006 [4]. One of its top recommendations was improved information sharing [t]o reduce the burden on clients and improve service, the Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat should [...] ensure that relevant information about federal investments in grants and contributions is easily available across government, and included a specific recommendation for the sharing [of a] recipients grant and contribution funding history through business numbers.  While this report resulted in many positive changes in how federal G&Cs were made, the recommendations for improved information sharing remain to be fulfilled.
The Benefits
Developing and implementing a standard for open G&C data will:
 Allow the nonprofit sector to identify, understand, and plan around the distribution of funds and resources, as well as increase opportunities for collaboration.
 Increase the value of data from individual departments by making it machine-readable and compatible across departments.
 Enable policymakers, researchers, media, and others to perform analysis on patterns of  spending  leading to greater accountability, better policies and more effective services.
 Demonstrate financial transparency to Canadians.
 Enhance Canadas global leadership by being the first national government to publish structured, standardized data about all grants and contributions.
It is important to emphasize that the only way that these benefits are achieved is if this data is published in a robust data standard designed specifically for these use cases. Publishing basic machine-readable data along the lines of what is currently available will not provide these results. This is why an advisory group must be consulted to develop this standard. Fortunately, Canada has deep expertise in this area, having been involved as a key contributor to many internationally recognized data standards.
Through Canadas leadership in the Open Government Partnership (OGP) and the International Open Data Charter, this standard could become a global norm for G&C-type of spending data. Because of Canadas expertise with multiple data standards,  the G&C data standard  could easily be designed to be interoperable with other international data initiatives such as procurement transparency, fiscal transparency, non-profit grantmaking, corporate transparency and international development aid transparency.
This is really important.  I've worked in non profits all my life.
What a good idea! Note the  need for involvement of the nfp Tim the design....
I worked in the federal government on funding practice reform during the era of the Blue Ribbon Panel. We found that we could not access even the most basic calculations of how much the Government of Canada was investing in the charitable nonprofit sector.In other words, no one had access to the big view of how and how much the government was investing on behalf of Canadians in citizen led organizations.  What a wonderful opportunity it would be to be able to see across the Gs&Cs programs of the federal government.Not only would we understand granting patterns and increase access to funding information, but it would also provide a valuable new data source in a a rapidly growing employment sector where we have a dearth of data.
I would like to add that this is a very important issue that needs to be addressed. I am glad it is being discussed!
In support of this proposal: All companies and nonprofits operating in Canada report to the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) using business numbers or other identifiers. To assist in linking government disclosures to specific entities, the Government of Canada should publish the names, business numbers and other identifiers of all reporting entities. Currently, Canada only publishes the numbers and identifiers of federally incorporated entities [1]. A new dataset should include, at minimum, the names, numbers and identifiers of provincially incorporated entities that report to the CRA. Without this dataset, merging the information provided by different governments and other sources into a single database to perform analysis is prohibitively expensive. When numbers and identifiers can be used as unique keys, merging is quick and easy. Preparing and releasing this new dataset would lower the cost of using all disclosures relating to nonprofits, including grants and contributions disclosures, thus increasing the use of the disclosures and enabling positive impacts from that use. 
I want to add my voice to those already listed. Having data about the sector is vitally important in terms of understanding how the sector is funded, and where that funding is going.
This is an excellent idea! Not only is this information important for understanding the the Government of Canada's stewardship of resources, it is crucial to improving decision making across the philanthropic sector. Federal grants and contributions directly affect the front line programming that occurs in communities across the country and should be taken into account whenever other funding bodies and grant makers make their own granting decisions. Having clear and usable data of what programs are being funded, and what level of investment is being made in addressing social challenges will improve the subsequent decision making of local governments, private foundations, and community foundations. Once a useful standard for reporting this data is established, other funders will be able to improve their reporting and more robust sets of sector wide data will be possible. From a grant making perspective (I work for Edmonton Community Foundation), standardized and open data of grants and contributions will profoundly improve decision making across the philanthropic sector.
Fantastic idea--and badly needed!
There is a lot of improvements that can be made to the G&C system in Canada which provides about 68% of the revenue of the registered charity sector.  Having greater and better transparency with G&Cs as suggested in this proposal is one important step.
PERSONAL INFORMATION REMOVED I would just point out that with respect to registered charities CRA does release the BN for everyone of them whether Federal or provincial corporations, trusts or unincorporated associations.  There are 86,000 registered charities which is obviously only a tiny number compared to for profit businesses. CRA does not release any information on the 80-100,000 non-profits that are not registered charities.  S. 241 of the ITA dealing with confidentiality needs to be revised.
A wide range of other countries are looking to Canada for its leadership in open data for the nonprofit sector, and with this proposal the Government of Canada has an opportunity to further advance its leadership in this area.  The creation of a standard for publication of G&C data would be enormously valuable to the research community, the nonprofit and charitable sector in it strategies for financial sustainability and improved services, and in meeting increased public expectations of transparency. I strongly support this proposal. Susan Phillips Professor and Program Director Graduate Program in Philanthropy and Nonprofit Leadership School of Public Policy and Administration Carleton University
As an academic in the sector, this is exactly the kind of data we would need. I do hope this proposal is taken seriously. Thank you
I am very much in support of this initiative - implementing a new Grants and Contributions Data Standard to make better data available to citizens, the nonprofit sector and public officials. Such an initiative would create a lot of benefits for the social sector and help all sectors have a clearer understanding of how federal money is distributed across regions, departments, communities and recipient organizations. This could reduce duplication of efforts, encourage collaboration and allow government to be more accountable to taxpayers.
As an entrepreneur working in the philanthropic sector, I support this proposal to develop a Grants and Contributions (G&C) Data Standard. Canada has a vibrant and growing not-for-profit sector and we need to build on that competitive advantage and lead the way globally  publishing structured, standardized data as described above.
This is a great idea and would create an invaluable resource for both grantors and grantees.
I echo the sentiments already expressed. While the ambition of sharing data and making it freely available for others to use is laudable, for the data to be truly useful and transformative - it needs to be presented and shared in a standardized manner. The Government has an opportunity to be a first-mover on this front and with the adoption of a common set of standards for data, other actors (including academic institutions and charitable organizations) will also be motivated to publish and share their own data sets according to a "universally" accepted standard.
UNICEF is concerned with the proportion and direction of investment in children by governments and, given the increasing importance of private flows, a more robust understanding of how the sector is directing its investments would be extremely valuable data.
This is a simple yet hugely powerful proposal.  Proper standardisation of data around grants would unlock huge benefits for grant makers and grantees - allowing for the first time a 360degree view of this substantial area of economic activity.  Over in the UK we have a basic open standard, already proven that could be tailored to Canadian needs.  And we shall shortly release a grant search tool for the UK based on the open data already being published to the standard.  We know PERSONAL INFORMATION REMOVED work and rate him highly.  For more see http://www.threesixtygiving.org/
The development of a Grants and Contributions (G&C) Data Standard would be a very valuable contribution to Canadian society and the data would become an important information resource. This initiative is one important step towards the goal of being able to link and integrate data across the non-profit sector.
This proposal makes a whole lot of sense when you consider that many of the Open Government commitments, and broader commitments pledged by the current government, will hinge on strong partnerships with outside actors, including those in the non-profit sector. This includes commitments to support experimentation, innovation, evidence-based decision making and improved digital services -- the non-profit sector has a role to play in all of these areas, so investing in the data infrastructure that supports the sector should be an early priority for the government.
"Voici une ide qui permettrait aux acteurs du secteur sans but lucratif de faire preuve de plus de transparence et de travailler en plus troite collaboration avec la socit civile et les bailleurs de fonds.
GT: Here's an idea that would allow non-profit sector players to show more transparency and to work more closely with civil society and donors."
Here in the United States, the Aspen Institutes Nonprofit Data Project has been stressing how important it is for government to provide a  complete and accurate picture of federal funds  including grants and contracts- awarded to nonprofit organizations.  Understanding the flow of grants and contracts to nonprofits will promote much better planning, collaboration and transparency.
As someone who works with data in the nonprofit world, I agree with many of the comments already made on this submission. Having standardized data on this sector is critical in being able to carry out important analysis from the perspective of both grantor and grantee. In addition, by providing leadership in this direction, I believe it will encourage others in the field to adopt open standards that makes the sharing and analyzing of data much more robust.
"We support this initiative. Information regarding federal government spending through grants and contributions is essential information that should be publicly accessible in an appropriate searchable web platform. We have identified four reasons why this information is critically important to the nonprofit sector. 1.	This data will help nonprofit and charitable organizations avoid duplication and develop innovative partnerships by allowing them to see what projects and funding is currently being provided on issues that are of importance to Canadians, such as homelessness, international development support, investments in sport, etc. 2.	The availability of this information will allow the nonprofit sector and our government counterparts to identify and address issues where there may be a gap in funding or program support, as well as identify trends and issues that are impacting Canadian communities. 3.	Publicly available data about grants and contributions will be a stepping stone to further analysis that will help us all understand effective outcomes, what works, and provide information that can lead to significant partnerships to respond to emerging issues. 4.	We have long recognized the lack of data available about the sector, including but not limited to grants and contributions, is putting our sector at risk in terms of our ability to innovate, evaluate, identify gaps and risks, and support our communities for the future.  For more information: http://theonn.ca/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/Submission_ONN_Regulatory-Co..."
As this excellent proposal makes clear, Canada has a prime opportunity to lead by example in creating a standard for Grants and Contributions (G&C) data. Drawing on my own experiences working in the nonprofit sector, I would argue that unless that G&C data is standardized, it will be difficult for social good organizations to make effective use of this data. The proposed G&C standard is an important step forward in ensuring that this open data set can be used to make the nonprofit sector more informed, agile, and transparent.
This will support the accessibility of data made available. Just because data is published does not mean it is usable. Good idea.
The government of Canada should developing and publicize a clear policy on the preservation of digital material.
I just "Voted Up" your idea. I wrote a comment on the idea entitled Meaningful Dialogue (Enabling Citizens), it addresses your idea regarding Digital Preservation, including preservation and public use on an indeterminate basis of the contents contained within this Digital Open Government Consultation Process.
With respect to this idea, we should explore whether the Government of Canada Web Archive, operated by Library and Archives Canada, is already sufficient or whether its operations ought to be expanded to meet citizens' and civil society's expectations for digital preservation. Of course, that first requires establishing what those expectations are. If we can add more detail here, that'd be a good start. http://www.collectionscanada.gc.ca/webarchives/index-e.html
If this idea is developed into a commitment, I recommend consulting with library associations, such as: The Canadian Association of Research Libraries The Canadian Federation of Library Associations (once it's operational) The provincial associations in BC, AB, MB, ON, QC, NS
A different sort of approach here might involve government support of a project like IPFS:  is a storage layer aspiring to become a critical part of internet infrastructure. It basically stores and finds data via a random-looking ID, that is derived directly from the contents of the file. This is in contrast to the current way of finding things, which involves storing named (ie labelled) files on specific servers. The benefit of IPFS's approach is that anyone can store the data and serve it. Since any version of -- for example -- a specific PDF file would the exact same label, anyone with the file could send it in response to a request. So instead of someone looking for "some-file.pdf", their computer would look for the random-looking (but NOT random) ID of the file, something like  That ID is derived directly from the contents of the file itself. Changing even the smallest thing (like the "last modified date" of the file), would completely change the ID. So long-story-short, as long as at least one person in Canada was interested in a file, they would have it in a Dropbox-like folder in their computer and could serve it to anyone else interested in having it. When IPFS gets up to speed, it's expected that some organizations (akin to the Internet Archive) will likely step up to warehouse lots of important information, like they currently do on the web. But the nice part of IPFS is that it allows anyone to contribute to the warehousing of data, just by keeping it on their own computer in a specific shareable place, preventing it from being lost.
I forgot to note that this idea was among the top recommendations of Mary Francoli in her Independent Reporting Mechanism (IRM) Progress Report, which she worded as "Develop and publicize a clear policy on the preservation of digital material" [1]. Open North's feedback to the draft 2014-16 action plan included a proposed commitment to "Complete public consultations with citizens, civil society and the private sector on how to ensure that open data of continuing value remains accessible and usable and continues to be collected" [2]. The Retention Guidelines for Common Administrative Records of the Government of Canada [2] are relevant to this proposal. I am unsure to what extent they already respond to the needs expressed in this proposal. 
A trusted digital repository is essential to publish the research  output of government of Canada departments and agencies.  I am specifically  speaking about publications either under crown copyright or publications  published in trade journals, currently knwon as peer reviewed publications.  Direction is required to address outstanding issues related to official  languages and accessibility.  My view of open government is that canadians at  large can access all publications from a single reliable site, free of  charge.
"To fully participate, people need to see the invitation of open data, and open data initiatives. Without this type of literacy, we are limiting participation to those who care to seek out solutions - we're moving too slow.

And this isn't only *just* understanding how to 'use' data, it's giving people a realization - that they can innovate for how we share, when we share, and what mechanisms can make using and understanding that information clearer; that they can invent and improve. Ultimately prosperity of individuals with this empowered learning, drive social-eocnomic benefits far and beyond what we can imagine.
"
Groups have done a good job in this area, but there is a lot more work to be done if this becomes a core part of our educational process.
I find it self-serving for the government to single-out the need to deny "frivolous and vexatious" requests from the public. Is this really a top-10 problem? Most criticism of the Act to date has focused on delays, lack of response and bad faith on the part of government institutions. Do we really need to give government authorities more reasons and latitude to say no? The reform proposals coming forward are pretty thin gruel so far and sadly reflect largely the perspectives of those on only one side of the service counter, i.e.. the government's. Let's hope this consultation doesn't just reinforce that!
Thread to capture random ideas and comments. All ideas also submitted elsewhere (postal codes and one thing per bill) 
Adding this from Jerry MacDonald, originally posted here: "Firstly, all information held by the Government of Canada and Parliament of Canada should be open by default, with certain specified limitations to protect: the personal privacy of Canadians; national security; safe disclosure intended to protect the health and safety of Canadians. Secondly, while individual Canadians have an inherent right of privacy, businesses and corporations do not. Any business or corporation wanting to do business with the Government of Canada or the Parliament of Canada should be prepared to accept openness and transparency in the expenditure of taxpayer dollars, or not bid on government contracts. Specific trade secrets may be protected, subject to the authority of the Information and Privacy Commissioner. Thirdly, Crown Corporations and other agencies, boards and commissions at the federal government level should be subject to the same openness and transparency as the Government of Canada proper, with the same limited exceptions as described. Finally, Canadian citizens, acting as private individuals, have the right to free and open access to public information. Professional journalists, registered lobbyists, agents of non-governmental organizations, and others acting on behalf of an association or group, may be asked to pay a nominal fee to defray the costs associated with information requests, provided such fee does not pose a deterrent to making such requests."
I'm not quite sure where this fits, so feel free to move the comment accordingly. But, it is time for Canada Post to release Postal Codes as open data sets under the Open Government Licence. Other jurisdictions have come to learn that access to Postal Code data is essential in creating a more open government. For example, the UK, Norway, Japan, the U.S., and Rwanda all release their geocoded Postal Codes.Meanwhile, Canada ranks 40th in the World on this issue. I believe this should be a priority for the next Open Government Action Plan
Just noting for future contributors that this idea has now been submitted separately at 
Make it so that any amount of money donated to a sitting MP must be publicly published if it exceeds a amount of 1000$. Include paying for fundraisers and such under the same category as donations. Allowing Canadians to be aware of possible conflicts of interest that might exist between MPs and the interests that finance them. believe this would go a great way toward rebuilding public trust in our politicians.
Make all public service email accessible to the public in real time, cached and searchable. This will do away with ate requests as the population can access the information at any time
I  think that the risk of this (which may be extreme openness) is : - bureaucrats are already too risk adverse, making their conversations over email open to the public will halt all communications; we need them to talk to each other more not less - raising the expectations of the public toward extreme openness in government is culturally and practically an issue - practically, a lot of these conversations are sensitive because they have private data, national security info, politically and socially sensitive subjects that need to be communicated to Canadians but not by exposing early or incomplete info from emails
"Canada has made progress on procurement transparency through its 2014-16 action plan. Canada can build on those commitments by endorsing and fully implementing related transparency initiatives.

A. Endorse and implement the Open Contracting Global Principles [1], which have been endorsed by the governments of the United Kingdom and Scotland [2].

B. Participate in the Construction Sector Transparency Initiative (CoST) [3] program, which 14 countries have joined including the United Kingdom [4].

C. Adopt the International Open Data Charter [5], which has been adopted by 10 national governments including Italy, France, Mexico and the United Kingdom [6].
"Parliaments around the world are adopting open parliament action plans as part of their Open Government National Action Plans. Legislative openness has been called ""one of the greatest success stories of the OGP"" [2]. The House of Commons of Canada could endorse the principles set out in the Declaration on Parliamentary Openness [3]. Supported by 140 organizations in 75 countries, the Declaration promotes a culture of openness by making parliamentary information transparent, easing access to parliamentary information, and enabling electronic communication of parliamentary information. Endorsing the Declaration would send a clear institutional signal to all Canadians that Parliament is commitment to these principles and opportunities for future collaboration on open parliament initiatives. Working with civil society, the Speaker of the House of Commons of Canada, or another parliamentary body, could explore which parliamentary mechanism would be appropriate to achieve this commitment idea.
Open government should be at the center of our democracy system and a major priority for the Canadian Government!
I believe Canada can be a world leader in Open Data and Open Government, by endorsing Parliamentary Openness we can truly be at the forefront of realizing a living breathing informed and empowered participatory democracy. I'm very excited to see this idea adopted!
Absolutely necessary initiative!
ParlAmericas, through its Open Parliament Network, supports the idea submitted by Open North to endorse parliamentary openness in Canadas National Action Plan and the principles set out in the Declaration on Parliamentary Openness. The role of parliament in supporting open government goes beyond enacting legislation on openness and conducting oversight of the National Action Plan, to opening parliament itself. The principles of parliamentary openness aim to create a culture fostering transparency, accountability, citizen participation and parliamentary ethics. Canada has shown leadership in this area through the parliaments legislative information service PARLINFO, the publication of parliamentarians expenditures report, mechanisms for engaging citizens on draft legislation, and its strong Conflict of Interest Code for current and former parliamentarians. Working with civil society and with the support of inter-parliamentary networks, the Speaker of the House of Commons of Canada, or another parliamentary body, could explore which parliamentary mechanism would be appropriate to further implement Canadas commitment to opening parliament.
Canada is still lagging behind the UK, France and the US in terms of open data initiatives. Having the HoC come out clearly in favour of open data principles and enshrining them can help make Canada a leader on the international scene.
Parliamentary openness is a vital component to any Open Government plan.  Ultimately, the main agent of government accountability is the legislative branch.  However, if they are to be effective, parliaments must embody the very openness they call for in government; otherwise, those calls will at best ring hollow and at worst be self-defeating.  As a federal, parliamentary democracy, Canada is in an excellent position to demonstrate international leadership in parliamentary openness.
Great way to strengthen democracy and getting people more engaged in the political process.
The  Open Government Partnership  is one of the most advanced efforts in defining Open Data priorities for Legislative and Decision-Making (LDM). The Parliament of Canada is one of the most advanced in the world in providing these services, and many in academia are convinced Canada should take the lead in helping this global community of practitioners develop and diffuse new best practices and IT solutions for Open Data.
Great initiative!!
It's great to see such initiatives developing around the globe. Open Parliament can be one step towards reconnecting citizens back to politics.
I support this idea!! More parliamentary openness in this country
Opening access to parliamentary information is imperative for the public to make informed political decisions. I support this  initiative!
Je supporte cette initiative !
The Declaration on Parliamentary Openness is a wide-ranging and forward-thinking document, and I believe the House of Commons should be looking at it closely.
A fantastic initiative to promote our government as being more open, transparent and accessible. This will appeal to citizens and would encourage them to become more engaged.
Promoting a culture of openness by making parliamentary information transparent and easy to access is important for collaborations both in government and with the community sector, particularly in youth-engagement. Open parliament and open data allow for better and more inclusive decision-making which contributes to a more resilient democracy.
Trs heureux de voir cette ida adopte! Extremely pertinent and overdue.
Openness and transparency could help transform our country into a real democracy where the people feel engaged and involved. I support open parliament.
Any step towards improving access to parliamentary information and data holds the potential to strengthen Canada's democracy by enabling greater collaboration and transparency. Joining with jurisdictions around the world in supporting the Declaration on Parliamentary Openness would provide a concrete step in the right direction and support future movement towards a truly open democracy.
Support this all the way!
Open Democracy Manitoba supports this idea. We believe that an effective democracy is inclusive, accountable, accessible and responsive. All of these traits can be strengthened by a culture of openness in parliament. We encourage the House of Commons of Canada to endorse the principles set out in the Declaration of Parliamentary Openness.  http://opendemocracymanitoba.ca
In my view, Legislative openness means more Transparency, and possibly better Engagement opportunities for Canadians, in addition to reinforcing Institutional Accountability.
We encourage this Government to sign the Declaration on Parliamentary Openness and signal to citizens your commitment to open and transparent Government. It's a win-win for all.
Canada should strengthen its commitment to demcracy by adopting Open North's proposal. Parliamentary openness is a vital component to any Open Government plan. Promoting a culture of openness by making parliamentary information transparent and easy to access is a fundamental building block of democracy
The Open Data Society of BC supports Open Norths proposal for endorsing parliamentary openness in Canada's National Action Plan. Open parliament will bring a new level of transparency and civic engagement to Canada with opportunities to improve the accessibility of legislative information and data.
"The data published by the Parliament of Canada -- like votes and speeches,  and much more -- is generally of high quality and consistency. Yet,  parliament could make more data accessible in open data format if it's information management approach engaged parliamentary data users more systematically.
High volume data users like Parliament.ca note that too often information that's technically available sometimes lacks documentation, support of any kind, or the licensing is not open/permissive. In some cases, like audio/video, the data is available internally but not available to the public, or in open data format. The demand for this data may not be clearly communicated nor acknowledged.
Committee schedules and other committee data, on the other hand, are not published as data. For a few years post-2011, whenever a section of parl.gc.ca was redesigned, XML data was included. Unfortunately, when the committees website was (nicely!) redone a few months ago, no data was included. It would be useful to include open data in all new development work.
There are other potentially interesting legislative data that isn't available, like structured data for legislation, written questions/answers and other tabled documents.
The work of the Hansard office is also a noteworthy example. While it does truly heroic indexing work, carefully categorizing each speech within a structured ontology, this isn't included in their public document XML, which could be extremely useful for research. A lot of great technical work is done, but in isolation from the needs of data users.
For parliamentary data users, and Canadians at large, having someone in the House of Commons with ""open data"" in their job description, who could engage with users, would be great step towards increasing open communication. This commitment idea, therefore, calls for an engagement process with parliamentary data users and stakeholders. This National Action Plan is an opportunity to develop a common approach and vision for a dynamic and innovative parliamentary data ecosystem in Canada.
"
Absolutely fantastic initiative!
Open data, accesible data is an essential component to having more engaged citizens. People should be able to take part in the advancement of this country and have a better chance to undertand the issues.  Entrepreneurs and social groups can use this data to improve communities relationship with their government. Open data is an economic opportunity, it is also a powerful social tool that can empower citizens to take ownership of their country.
Super easy to do but very useful and engaging!
The example of the Hansard papers is quite perfect to demonstrate the lack of usability certain data has. Having used them numerous times for both my studies and work, it is tedious beyond belief having to go through every single PDF to find valuable information. We should be able to make this easier.
Wholeheartedly support this idea!
I am fully in support of this!
It would be great to have more open and accessible data on Canada's Parliament.
I approuve ! Open data is the key to a more open parliament !
The academic community is highly interested, for research purposes, to reuse parliamentary open data. We definitely need an open ontology (preferably in a portable standard such as OWL2), representing not only the topics discussed, but also very possible relationships involved (e.g., laws, regulations, government entities, key positions and their title holders, external entities, interest groups, etc.). Reusing Semantic Web technology, we would then be best positioned to automatically annotate all contents, but furthermore enable complex queries that would narrow down automatically, and allow automated recommendation, of contents based on predefined custom requirements.
I support this idea and think it will really go far in the effort to engage more citizens.
All publicly funded data should be published and freely available online by default unless a case can be made that access should be restricted. The burden for making said case should be on those collecting, storing and potentially publishing the data and should demonstrate some REAL (not perceived) potential for ACTUAL harm (as opposed to tarnished reputations, etc.). The case should be presented to a body consisting of data producers, users and others who may be affected by restriction of access. Said body would rule if the restriction of access is justified.
Through my work with groups like Civic Tech Toronto (http://civictech.ca) I have seen first-hand the transformational power that open data holds in helping people work together to better understand and improve civic life. I have also seen the challenges that citizens and other groups have in working with data that is sometimes poorly structured, difficult to access, etc. Having someone within Parliament who could act as a conduit between open data users and providers would be a huge leap forward in enabling greater collaboration in the interest of the public good.
Open Democracy Manitoba builds online tools to help citizens better understand and engage with local government and the democratic process. Our projects are strengthened by the existence of well-structured and well-documented open data. We support Open North's proposal for the House of Commons to improve the usability of parliamentary open data in collaboration with the users of its data. http://opendemocracymanitoba.ca
The exchange of information can only strengthen the relationship Government has with citizens. Fair Vote Canada uses open data and we really appreciate have facts in hand. Open, transparent Government will benefit all.
Dogwood Iniative believes that open, transparent government, particularly parliament, will benefit all. Open North's proposal is a no brainer. All publicly funded data should be published and freely available online by default unless a case can be made that access should be restricted. Having an open data facilitator within parliament will help install trust in government by making it more accessible and transparent.
As the creator of openparliament.ca, a resource built on open Parliamentary data that's used by thousands of Canadians every day, I wholeheartedly support incorporating Parliamentary data and openness into the Action Plan, and these ideas are an excellent starting point.
Problem to be addressed: Canadas current legal framework for whistleblowing is outdated and out of step with internationally recognized best practices. The most serious deficiencies are 1) lack of protection for public sector whistleblowers, either at a federal or provincial level, and 2) an almost complete lack of coverage of the private sector.
Most of the current legislation focuses on procedures for handling allegations of wrongdoing, rather than on protection for the whistleblowers. At the federal level, the Public Servants Disclosure Protection Act (PSDPA) created two new agencies: (1) the Office of the Public Sector Integrity Commissioner and (2) the Public Servants Disclosure Protection Tribunal. Only the Tribunal can provide whistleblowers with a remedy, but access to the Tribunal is controlled by the Integrity Commissioner. The effectiveness of this mechanism has been brought into question, as the Commissioner has referred only seven whistleblowers to the Tribunal, and no case has yet reached the point where the Tribunal could order a remedy for the whistleblower.
One example of the shortcomings of the PSDPA is that the onus is on the whistleblower to prove that adverse actions were intended by the employer as reprisals: an almost impossible task. Best practice is to reverse the onus by requiring the employer to prove that adverse actions against the whistleblower were not reprisals. Of the six provinces that have whistleblowing laws, only one (Ontario) provides a mechanism for whistleblowers who have suffered reprisals to seek a remedy. None of Canadas whistleblowing laws contains adequate measures for preventing or halting reprisals in the first place, before the whistleblower suffers serious harm.
There is virtually no coverage of the private sector in Canadian whistleblowing laws. The federal law (the PSDPA) does not address private sector wrongdoing.  For the public sector wrongdoing that it does cover, the PSDPA does not allow private sector participants to be either investigated or sanctioned.
There are currently no steps being taken to bring Canadian laws in line with best practices per Canadas G20 commitment. The PSDPA, which came into force in 2007, requires that the President of the Treasury Board conduct a five year review of the legislation and report on the review to Parliament and the Senate. Despite this legal obligation, no review has been conducted to date.
Main Objective: Demonstrate a commitment to creating a strong federal legislative framework that will enable workers in both the private and public sectors to speak up about wrongdoing, risk or malpractice without fear of reprisal; and work with the provinces to provide similar frameworks at a provincial level.
OGP Challenge Addressed: Improving public integrity, improving public services, increasing corporate accountability
Verifiable and measurable milestones to fulfill the commitment:
Conduct a formal and independent review of the Public Servants Disclosure Protection Act, with substantive input from civil society and internationally-recognized experts, and publicize the recommendations of the review (August 2017)
Draft and table amendments to existing federal law to afford whistleblower protection to all cases of wrongdoing involving government resources, regardless of the employment status of the participants (public or private sector) (2018).
Launch a public consultation on the development of a federal whistleblower protection law that covers private sector wrongdoing (2018).
Establish a dialogue with the provincial governments and agencies, particularly those without whistleblower protection laws, to discuss how to enhance whistleblower protection in these jurisdictions (2017).
I fully support the submission made by Transparency International Canada. Protection of those who are brave enough to expose corruption, usually at considerable risk to themselves and their careers, must be a priority in Canada.
A strong free, free press is a cornerstone of democratic societies. However, the ability of the press to lift the veil on corruption in the public and private sectors often hinges upon courageous individuals willing to speak up about wrongdoings. Too often, these whistleblowers pay a serious price and face losing their livelihoods and  threats to their personal safety. Canada must take action to strengthen whistleblower protection for individuals in the public and private sector.  I support TI-Canada's submission, which calls upon the government to take action to reform Canada's whistleblowing laws. TI-Canada's submission details clear milestones, which should be spelled out in Canada's Action Plan on Open Government 2016-2018. Canada cannot effectively fight corruption, if those people who put everything on the line to expose it, are not protected.
I fully support the contents of the submission on whistleblower protection and current laws regulating whistleblowing.  I would urge the President of the Treasury Board, who is responsible for launching the promised five-year review of the legislation, to initiate this long-overdue Review.
"In its 2011 report, Getting tough on environmental crime? Holding the Government of Canada to account on environmental enforcement [1], Ecojustice includes five recommendations relating to open government and open
 data (see pages 64 to 69):

- The Government of Canada, led by Environment Canada, should establish and seek funding to maintain a comprehensive online environmental enforcement and compliance database for all federal environmental laws and regulations. The database should be updated regularly (monthly) and should enable geographic and facility-based data analysis.

- Work towards releasing enforcement information across all Government of Canada departments in a consistent manner using multiple user-friendly formats.

- Fulfill the promise of open government and proactive disclosure policies by releasing the enforcement and compliance information for these particular laws that are stored in the restricted NEMISIS database.

- Ensure that sufficient resources are available for departments, particularly Environment Canada, to do the necessary reporting and associated quality control.

- Departments within the federal government, including but not limited to Environment Canada, Fisheries and Oceans Canada and Transport Canada, should proactively and comprehensively release all non-confidential information regarding enforcement actions, including but not limited to: inspections, investigations, warnings, orders, prosecutions, convictions, penalties/fines, and number of facilities, as well as compliance information concerning regulated entities.  If this is not achieved through a comprehensive online database for the whole of the federal government, then it should at a minimum be released on department websites and as part of annual reporting under specific laws.
"Within the Open Government Partnership, government and civil society are intended to be partners and co-creators of the National Action Plan.
To achieve this, over 30 OGP countries use multi-stakeholder forums. The forums provide a permanent dialogue mechanism between government and civil society, participating as equal partners in agreeing the National Action Plan and planning and monitoring in its implementation. For additional context, we are sending via email an OGP draft document describing these forums.
To date, the Government of Canada has been going through each stage of the OGP process unilaterally, without the active participation and collaboration of civil society.
To remedy this, on March 29, we launched the Canadian Open Government Civil Society Network (http://www.opengovdialogue.ca). Our purpose is to establish a permanent dialogue mechanism and to engage more civil society organizations in the OGP. Since then, 26 organizations have signed the letter of intent (attached with signatories).
To lead the network, an interim steering committee was formed. Its members are:
Gail Davidson, Lawyers' Rights Watch Canada David Fewer, Canadian Internet Policy and Public Interest Clinic Jean-No Landry, Open North Michael Lenczner, Powered by Data James McKinney Toby Mendel, Centre for Law and Democracy Sukanya Pillay, Canadian Civil Liberties Association
After discussions and meetings with civil servants in the Treasury Board Secretariat, we are submitting a proposal for a multi-stakeholder forum (attached).
In preparing this proposal, we spoke with civil society representatives in countries with permanent dialogue mechanisms, we spoke with the OGP Support Unit to learn about other countries experiences, we built on the resources they provided, and we integrated their feedback to our proposal.
Many OGP countries have formed multi-stakeholder forums through executive decrees and similar instruments. Canadas forum should be formed through an Order-in-Council, to protect it from easily becoming inactive through, for example, the neglect of a new government after an election. We can provide sample orders from other countries.
We look forward to further refining this proposal in the next phase of the consultation on the OGP National Action Plan in June.
Regards,
James McKinney, on behalf of the Interim Steering Committee of the Canadian Open Government Civil Society Network
 developed to Ontario Privacy Commisioner PrivacyByDesign standards by Vancouver company, could be used to connect with open government as well as to connect to the 4 levels of government for civic engagement and to allow neighbourhoods and streets to connect.   Every poll, survey, discussions from any of these groups at all levels of government builds the group for all future polls, surveys, discussions.  We need a new way to connect for open government that works at all levels otherwise every civic engagement starts over and we will continue to miss the opportunity and miss involving people that are interested in making Canada, our provinces, our municipalities and our rural communities better.
We need federal government to help connect at provincial and local levels as well. We need online civic engagement to be a new way for everyone to help make all of our governments better.  Currently we have silo thinking at each level of government. see my previous comment as well.
We cannot afford the overhead to have each civic engagement connect to the public. We also need to be able to connect people together based on their location in Canada and based on their interests at all levels of government.
This would be very useful! Would love to see leadership on this from the GoC.
I like to participate the program
"Hello, and thank you for scheduling these events. Do you have any updated information on when the Ottawa event will take place, what the program will be, and if any events are planned for Toronto before the first stage of the process ends on May 15?
Thank you,
Duncan Pike
Campaigns and Advocacy Coordinator
Canadian Journalists for Free Expression"
Yes , I would like more information on participating on planning for our government to be more transparent and honest in governing this beautiful country of Canada
"Je viens de recevoir l'invitation par courriel aujourd'hui le 5 avril.  En anglais.  Enfin.... Mais le sujet m'intresse et j'aimerais bien participer aux changes et discussions sur le sujet.  Merci.
GT: I just received the email invitation today on 5 April. In English. Finally .... But the subject interests me and I would like to participate in trade and discussions on the subject. Thank you."
I like to participate the program
Really informative forum.Much thanks again. Keep writing.
Would also be lovely if someone in a position of authority would clearly articulate to departments who has the authority to authorize developers to push code to GitHub / open source community, so that they don't all have to figure it out individually.
This is a great opportunity to allow Canadians to engage with Government, and for everyone to see, in a transparent way, what the Government is designing to serve Canadians. It would be great to have demos/working examples o a live site for people without programming skills to be able visualize what is being developed as well. Maybe something like labs.canada.ca that would be similar similar to old Google labs.
The CBC and NFB produce massive amounts of content annually but all of it is tightly controlled with heavy restrictions on use and re-use (even for educational institutions). Libraries currently have no rights to archive and make accessible this digital content for future generations. It would be amazing to see this content opened up to other memory institutions for long term curation. The NFB in particular charges for everything (even it's Vimeo channel) and both organizations reserve all rights on content that is produced with a lot of government money.
Hi Kent Thanks for the Open Data presentation at Carleton U last week. You will remember me asking about crown corporations such as CanadaPost, Navcanada and EDC. I have not looked closely at the OpenData bill from 2014, does it mention companies that are closely linked to the government? There is also Canadiana.ca, a non-profit which is funded by Innovation Canada and Canadian universities, uses office space in LAC, and so is controlled by government organizations. Its data is not open. What will happen in this case? Thanks Rick
"Internet access is now recognized as a fundamental human right for the 21st century. To ensure the wealth of people, the wealth of communities, the wealth of a 21st century social-political-economy, the wealth of nations requires a ubiquitous digital infrastructure as a public commons. Only in this way can all the spill-over benefits and network effects be nourished and harnessed. Infrastructure is best managed and governed as a commons.
The most salient costs in the 21st century are increasingly 'opportunity costs' the costs involved in generating and seizing opportunity. In an age of accelerating change -the key to sustainable social conditions is the scaling of learning - life-long learning. Only a digital infrastructure that is not held hostage to 'rent-seeking' incumbents can provide the neutrality and access for unparalleled, unprecedented connectivity.
The social-political economy of the 21st century will involve exponential growth in virtual goods, services, innovation - because information is not scarce nor is it a 'rival' good. Our future economy and society must provide the infrastructure and commons that enable inclusive, ubiquitous, and unpredictable participation."
more "tools" available to Canadians; so citizens can access and collaborate and information is updated
Why now? Will there be funding / resources? Our departments what we have / what we need? Clean up
How this affects the First Nations / Aboriginal people?
A quel type d'information et de donnes les citoyens souhaitent avoir accs. RT (Rough translation): what type of information and data do citizens wish to have access to.
Asking the public what they would like to see opened up. Put the focus on the citizens rather than public servants. Consolidation of metadata to improve the filtering information.
Relevance to each member of the public: community, schools, hospitals, libraries, shopping malls. 
What measures the government is doing to promote, educate, and inform people why they should care.
How will government make information relevant to the public? How will government make information understandable to the public? How will government make the public aware of information?
what do they (the public) need to help with their day to day lives that government can provide?
Impacts to governance (public + role of govt) and are citizens ready to engage?
what do citizens really want? Is government really interested in being open?
What do Canadians want in terms of Open Government? 
License agreements
Shared platforms - (Data portals)
How to bring more municipalities and organizations online with their data?
What is the digital preservation strategy?
preservation of historical data and connecting the data / info over time
Ask NGOs:  What questions do you have?  What data would help you with your argument? 
How do we make open data useful to the average citizen?
focus on particular challenges; climate change, public health, consumer protection; economic development 
How to change citizen engagement at grassroots level to ensure that citizens are getting data that they need and want?
More practical and less theoretical
Provide an example that has happened recently for future presentations
Quels sont les grandes directions du Canada? RT: What are the major directions of Canada?
Fiabilit des donnes ouvertesmtadonnes. RT: Reliability of open datametadata.
What is the most important information to you and why?
How do we really engage youth in civic issues? Ie. Problem vs. solution
How can we engage the private sector?
Be sure to empower youth to build their own engagement processes
What are the outreach efforts that are engaging youth specifically?
How do we motivate participation?
How to reach people who are unengaged and engage them (show them importance and impact of government) ?
What issue that youth face can the government address? Eg. Youth suicide rates
How can we make government accessible and welcoming to all, especially youth?
How can we use this 'data' for innovation?
Why doesn't government procurement allow/reflect today's entrepreneurs and start-ups to scale?
Standardization of open data in Canada, across municipal, provincial and federal levels.
What feedback do people get from politicains when they give feedback?
How to use open data to take action--> access isn't an endpoint, it's a transition
How can government officials ensure commitments to transparency stem from top to bottom and employees buy-in on these initiatives?
Placespeak- Geolocated (Privacy by design) civic engagement at all 5 levels.
Seed discussion from previous input. Don't start from scratch.
Creating a participative infrastructure.
What is important to the public-- ensure that the government doesn't 'decide' what open means-- what is important to be 'open'.
Funding models.
How municipal, provincial and federal governments can work together?
How to ensure standards of open data at the local and regional level.
Open source software model.
Relationship between 'open' and 'trust' (one doesn't lead to the other).
How can we farm data from the public to create unique datasets yet protect privacy and ensure quality. 
A Canada-wide commitment to the release of select high value (fundamental) data.
Standardization.
What can't be shared? What happends with data misuse?
Can we define privacy more effectively, such that more data can potentially be released.
Building data literacy in communities.
Engaging the average citizen in the conversation around open data.
How are you collaborating?
Digital collaboration between different government levels.
The organization of data released by governments.
What information?
Comment changer la culture dmocratique. RT: How to change the democratic culture.
How can we streamline/simplify public data to ensure it is understandable and relevant?
How/ options explored to operationalize open data.
How do we make open government a national imperative, not just a federal one.
How smaller jurisdictions with fewer resources can be more open -- especially when dealing with legacy systems/ data sets.
How does an organization culturally shift to one that is more open and knows how to share/ use data.
What should/ shouldn't we share when it comes to HR information.
How best can the government of Canada provide leadership on open data?
"Making open data work for agriculture and nutrition requires a shared agenda to increase the supply, quality, and interoperability of data, alongside action to build capacity for the use of data.

 The Global Open Data for Agriculture and Nutrition (GODAN) initiative includes partners from across the globe, States, Private Companies, Civil Society, united by the common belief that sharing agriculture and nutrition data makes us stronger, more innovative and as a result, in a better position to address the emerging food security challenge while developing wealth through the stimulation of global ag markets. The key pillars of the organisation are private and public world leaders, clear supporters of knowledge and innovation.

 The GODAN network can act as a convener, bringing to Governments solutions, ideas, expertise around the world from other governments on how to solve common problems through the use of open data. For example: ensure public access to weather data, trade data, geographic data, soil and water data, registries of agricultural inputs - to use open data to monitor and enhance the implementation of key food security, agriculture and nutrition plans, and the full achievement of the SDGs.

 GODAN can introduce relevant Government officials to success stories, lessons learned, interoperability, through access, dissemination, licensing - with a special focus on increasing agricultural and nutrition productivity. Currently there are 5,135 agriculture datasets and 20 nutrition datasets available on Canadas Open Data Portal [1] [2]. We would like to help advocate for and facilitate the release of many more datasets of general public interest in these areas.

 GODAN is in a unique position, acting as the connection between the ultimate data users - the population - those who make it possible developing applications that make use of it to answer needs from the public - the private sector - and Governments, source of the data and in turn, of additional satisfaction from the populations.

 In other words, through open data, GODAN helps Governments and civil society build up a true partnership for development.
"The Government of Canada should study the possibility of an all-of-government or selective waiver of Crown copyright. If data paid for by Canadians belongs to Canadians, as written in the Liberal platform [1], then Canadians should by default have the right to copy, modify and distribute these data without restriction. Establishing this legal norm will further accelerate the transition to open by default, as all information and data would be born open.

In New Zealand, such a waiver was considered during the development of its NZGOAL (New Zealand Government Open Access and Licensing) framework [2]: At a policy level, guidance which advocated all-of-government or even selective waiving of Crown copyright (for departments) and copyright (for other State Services agencies) would be a substantial move and one which is considered more appropriate for consideration in the context of any future reform of the Copyright Act.
In Canada, a reform of the Copyright Act is not necessary, as the Copyright Act already allows for selective waiver of Crown copyright. For example, the Reproduction of Federal Law Order [3] is an Order in Council permitting the reproduction of federal law. Tamir Israel of CIPPIC described some of the considerations in this mailing list thread [4].
Noting that the wording in the first paragraph is from mine and Bernard Rudny's piece in Policy Options: 
Good body of law around this threshold and laws/regulations about this that contain saturation for points of masking.
Consensus and iterations- starts with iterations. Start somewhere.
People jump on moving train.
Make the engagement easier- conencting municipal data level- 10 most common datasets should have common standard. (eg placespeak.com)
Obligation to keep public informed.
Engagement with communities not just top down.
Promotions or ideas like 'building Canada initiative'
Citizen centred model.
Explore funding categories etc.
Grants to cover costs or giving out the data for smaller communities.
Need federal government to enforce open data standards. Standards for datasets- e.g. Sherbrooke
"Need standardized base maps for Canada (emergency services)
Should North America consolidate/open data standards/sharing"
Licensing workshops to see what could be released.
Access to data in smaller communities and large areas where people live.
Funding to help enable them. More local events. Appoint lead federally to give them 'open government in a box'.
Provinces play a more facilitator role.
Can be localized. Can roll up. Like Fernwood Neighbourhood Association.
BC Civic Info- open data platform- make it part of the internal process.
PlaceSpeak in local areas and have conversations.
When the federal government currently doesn't have a leadership role in setting/creating standards-- should work with local/provincial government (some best practices underway)
Open parcel map-- municipal level of the reluctance to contribute.
Address standard- up to municipalities to meet it. Data quality standards-- all municipalities set/ create their own.
Templates/guidelines for datasets released on Open Data to set a standard and 'Get started Package' (Core datasets to start with)
Municipality not contributing data for various reasons-- don't know how to, legal issues.
Jurisdictional boundaries are artificial to many consumers- hindrance.
Federation on Canadian municipalities-host. 
Issues:environmental.
Topic variety in what attracts connection.
Observation- no local municipal representatives at this workshop.
Health authorities are autonomous.
Challenge around best practices -data warehousing.
Language changing to make FOI better. What can't be released- then all the rest.
Is then money from FEOS to allow data to get access?
Nation that all addresses should be open data. Need granular level- census and address. (public domain and legislated)
Mapping addresses (what it is?)
Critically important that Government of Canada maintain privacy-- if not census will become corrupt and will not want to participate.
StatsCan will do special studies.
Feedback- methods to find the impact or information sharing-- understanding where data comes from via indicators.
Need data ownership (who owns what), in BC municalities, create own addresses.
Give data to a firm by contrast (i.e. a park causes problems or holding data). 
Need to release proactive information on health- information at least at the facility level.
Federal government: removing requirement for data to be domiciled (data transmitting via USA). Keeping data in Canada is super important. (Cant't enforce laws anymore if lose control of data).
Type of data. Real time vs. historical.
Open data vs open source definition / licensing.
Issues around ownership of data and paradigm
Fact based data and issues of copyright e.g. street address.
Cost of making data open-- limited resources so what is more valuable.
Different if data transitions through USA but stored in Canada- not losing sovereign control of data.
Canadians highly value privacy issues than citizens of the USA. 
Federal Government encouraging standards, governance, return to original Open by Default
Silos reflected in data.
Standards- who defines these.
If you want to apply social services- not having these details open it/ impedes services (development of services).
How to be conscious of negative impacts of release of granular data.
Adoption of OGI terms.
Focus on "daily live" issues so Canadians can benefit from direct, positive consequences (jobs, housing, daycare, education, small business, local information etc). e.g. weather - we don't even open a door any more 
Federal government is more removed from daily lives than municipal / provincial governments (e.g. people care about garbage pickup, schools)
Reach out to Canadians in plain language and show how they fit into big picture. Why this is important and expected outcome to allow better discussion.
"Promotional / educational tools for open government / open data
Focus on using plain, easy to understand language - avoid jargon (GC terminology)"
"Awareness: internal, external communication - show how it can empower; should aim to show what open government means to AVERAGE Canadian; paid through taxes! 
The Census is an example- opportunity to show its mechanism for engagement.  "
"Add into curriculum of schools - how to use data, civics class, computer classes on building apps, etc.
Have a kiosk at those places"
Need to improve interaction with post-secondary institutions, as they have great free resources
Use public figures like Trudeau / Mansbridge 
Use public schools to use and share OG
To improve civic engagement, provide more resources to train / attract data scientists
Engaging in dialogues on what is going on in their community.
Citizen understanding of portal features and government.
Engagement with the public is limited to those actively participating - are we really getting input from ALL relevant parties?
Marginalizing populations that have barriers to access i.e. remote populations that have unreliable connections; low income populations that can't afford internet connections"
Better outreach to isolated communities
We are getting input on what people want, but can they help us decide?
Tools for engagement: Public (moderated) town halls / online town halls; facebook; skyping
Open dialogue across all levels of government would create in-roads for federal level consultations 
"Need to overcome negative perception of federal public service in order for engagement to occur
question in the Census?"
"AWARENESS: communicate engagements through local, diverse community groups to let more diverse participation - engage with public schools - government should go to schools
Engage local papers - regular column in Metro - When policy initiative starts, people should know about it"
Release open data and information to coincide with public consultations - release before to have equal dialogue
Missing grassroots aspect. Citizen accessing own data (personal information) to see where they fit in the big picture. i.e. Citizen Account. (e.g. criminal record checks - individuals could allow employers access to their personal info files)
"A social media-type approach (crowd sourcing ideas) allows people to react in a timely fashion
time / turnover and follow up is important - don't gather data / ideas and not follow up and do it in a timely fashion"
Ensure facts are based on concrete arguments and not emotional factors. Engage in meaningful and respectful discussions. Have facts available and distributed. 
Increase collaboration / consultation through more virtual conferences
Social media: but where to go? Portal on Canadian government to log your views / opinions on policies? Consult draft policies publicly (or key points at least)- will this help/convince Ministers to approve?
"Issues: financial - economy, jobs, growth
Water! Clean, accessible, reliable water sources
Aboriginal issues"
Connect up issues that affect people - diseases of trees, how to create; groups come to gather to create comprehensive information
Use of social media to improve access and dialogue
"Continue the dialogue by having accessible methods for interaction with / to the public and to listen for public ideas. 
Access to web tools needs to improve and be continuously up to technology"
Have "hackathons" across government -  not just for coders.
"Do we understand the needs? 
Better collaboration: comments, feedback from external to GC
Politicians should engage publicly more, collaboratively at all 3 levels of government
"The use of consultations: 
crowd source policies for more direct feedback and suggestions from the public
include different fields in the planning
request feedback on drafts
Silos - Privacy / Security vs. "
Focus on Issues: environment; healthcare / public safety / public health; employment / economy
Boaty McBoat Face: must crowd source with caveats... 
Must demonstrate that public input is valuable and actually considered e.g. youth advisory for new museum (science/tech) get to have a say in some decisions; civic engagement for kids (and other groups)
Improve civic engagement - include public policy development
What issues facing Canada would most benefit open collaboration
Most R&D money goes to academics - how do we take advantage of that intellectual capital?  
Include public: publishing drafts and asking for feedback - not just within government; ask the public too
Public safety: policy development and open collaboration
More citizen-enable services. Ability for citizens to be able to see who is accessing their data and other data
Common language on resources - try to aim to the popular; or at least provide clear definitions
Financial information - decisions and justification (details). Progress on initiatives - lessons learned when initiatives that are stopped for long term accountability. 
Transparency (i.e. sale of arms to Saudi Arabia) - what is promised vs. what is actually done.
Fiscal responsibility - releasing information and data will lower the costs of ATIP process. 
Needs funding; links to revenues.
Maybe demonstrate financial opportunities related to Open Data.
Rapid digitization policy: complement with CAD standards to attach common meta data to data and information to provide the opportunity to search data and information on the portal ... federated search.
Scientific work - Canadians were prevented from accessing what they paid for.
"PDF with OCR should be included as a format: need a public repository / common system that organizations use to share information
Mobile friendly; meta data friendly"
Open information portal indexed by larger search engine. OPEN FORMATS: not proprietary- open source. Versatile metadata: integrate terms used from public searching. PDF not open, but need formats that can be preserved long term
Access to full ATIP request available through the Open Government would hold the government accountable
Proactively disclose all former ATIP requests for general consumption of all Canadians.  
"More engagement with politicians
Policy decision for week: able to vote but need a proper survey."
"Funding - pathological underfunding of management of change, information management / architecture, business support models - Business transformation will allow funding re-allocation
Relying on departments to fund open government  "
Find proof of Premise that there are benefits to openness and sharing GoC information with businesses and citizens
"there is a risk that government departments are contributing what is cheap and easy
Why not start with open dialogue to get input?"
Measuring competencies; accountability; rewards; performance measurement."
Answer comments posted for the dataset in a timely manner.
Consultation processes / metrics
What is the evidence that demonstrates the value of open government?
Tracking changes to: readiness; internal (government) - external (the public)
Publish more - can't access if it's not made available. Different formats, user friendly. 
Standardize common formats that are accepted globally for machine readable datasets."
"Issue with open by default for administrative information - not useful to make ALL open by default
Need to identify information of value - citizens don't need access to junk"
need QUALITY datasets - not stale
What's the "magnet" to find the needle in the haystack?  metadata! (and its quality)
Packaging = use standards - use ISO.
More publishing at the group level and the individual level. "
Provide infographics with machine readable data. 
Release more in multiple formats, don't restrict to one format
True accounting, data integrity and quality
Currency of information
Allow for linked data - prompt user with questions to help them link one set to another - suggested datasets.
Get people better connected to all kinds of resources (not just data and information) accessibility is tied to awareness (information should be pushed to parties we know would benefit from it, we can't wait for people to discover the resources)
Working effectively: timely information; easy to digest; searchable; organized and relevant.
Governance -Decision-making framework
How to follow up on subjects of interest
"Open government site not currently user-friendly - content is not organized.
Content driven by departmental decisions, not by public demand.
Average Canadian is ggoing to go to Google first for government information - open government portal needs to link, metadata.
Organize content by topic - feed data into current events. Massive data dump is not effective."
Citizen benefit of improving access:  Application for personal private citizen use. Going beyond socio-economic benefits - implications for saftey, UNKNOWN, and simply makign lige easier by facilitating processes of info parliament.  Think linkedin or yellow pages.  
Need first to tackle the "open" issue within government of Canada before we can be "open" to the public.
Be less risk-averse; less approvals; don't focus as much on providing / releasing 'perfect' information/data
"Tools and a framework to better describe data: 
* Risk of inappropriate data getting out - needs to be a framework / agreement on what gets published, when.
""Awareness"""
Need appropriate communications plan to reach the audience for the particular policy or topic
Allow for citizens to transition in and out of the public service easily in order to address current brain drain and increase collaboration between public and private sector
Set up a quicker response system, to enable government and legislative branch to not continue blocking innovative technologies (e.g. Uber - being driven underground because of slow response). 
Enable more risk taking in government or at least change the culture of fear regarding risk taking / innovation
Tools and information required: accessibility, language, sharing of information. There is a required framework. There is reluctance to share data / information so there have to be rules around when / what data to share. A clear and well communicated plan.
"Citation tracking (like for journal articles) how many times has this government information / data been cited?"
"Tools and Information to hold GC to account:
Need scalable tools / expectations for smaller organizations as they may not have the resources that are (there is no more on this point)
Guidelines and tools to clarify what ought to be contributed; social media"
Presentation - contextualized / interpreted - Raw data plus relevant context
Have public servants realize that it's for everyone; not just IM. All fields should be empowered to contribute.
Change management - how we communicate - Managing risk - privacy; the media
Increase government dialogue through more online discussions. Provide internet access to all- ease of access like mobile apps
"Engagement: face to face contacts - Service Canada kiosks * partnerships with educators to engage young Canadians - social media?
*Contests / Challenges / Prizes"
Social media: good place to start! Opportunity for people to participate rather than just sit and listen. Don't wasts money talking "at" people
Go to places where the public congregates - Awareness through community events at municipal level: libraries, shopping centres, schools, hospitals, health centres (critical places to connect with people)
"The ability to access data and information from all three levels of government and private sector
Interconnected access to and use of information and data
"Partnership with provinces / municipalities to engage locally - local reps to be on the ground; engagement like 1-800-OCANADA (Service Canada)
e.g. immigrants see themselves as ""new Canadians"" not Ontarians"
"Central repository with focus on retention and disposition
The creation of a centralized government repository for all data/information inorder to provide universal retention to government data. Currently departments host data; apply their own retention disposition - leads to destruction at the end of value but how do Canadians decide? This leads to destruction of tons of data that could be useful to Canadians for longitudinal studies. "
"ATIP disclosure 
ATIP: analyse information being requested and proactively disclose information instead of only providing summary."
privacy and security
Access to data must be readily available. WIFI must be available to all if data is to be shared. 
Value needs to drive content
Ease of access and accessibility
Culture change - Culture change: current culture is closed. Sharing information - successes and failures; collaboration and honesty. 
Making the public service more open to enable better collaboration between academic, private sector and public sector. Also, public service moves slowly so how does it deal with disruptive technology?
Centre of excellence - Open ERDMS: Centre of Excellence for exchanging best practices GC-wide (e.g. showcase museum example; also showcase results/use of dat / info (e.g. outcomes  from CODE); demonstrate what's possible - win people over.
Make it better known that engagement is available potentially through out civic society agencies. 
Reach out to relevant advocacy groups. 
Invest in education of open portal for buy-in and otherwise abstracted thoughts, with tools, reports policy etc. 
Support digital literacy- awareness and communicate, but also provide learning opportunities
Post secondary education; high school etc. Reach students at all levels 
Online engagement = digital literacy. What kind of digital literacy and who would support that? 
Education, especially continuing education and school curriculum
What about those without access to computers? Engagement must be varied - not just online. 
Target and segment citizens rather than broad targets - get to people at the point of need. 
Having the engaged audience getting together (focus groups) and talk about what is most effective
Reaching out to media, community, interest groups to promote open data. Mix up engagement between online, paper and meetings. 
Identify the real target - identify the stakeholders and focus on their concerns and issues
Ensure that information being gathered is what citizens want (Understand the segments)  What is useful vs what is random knoweldge? What will be served by it?
To improve engagement the topic of the engagement must be specific - not a shotgun approach
Issues include; climate change, jobs  creation, mobility, gameification
Last mile solution - ensuring we identify the users and get info into their hands - who is there to support the end user and create the connectivity? 
Create material that is digestible to consumers - Trusted, authorative, & Responsive to demand
Decentralization of the process to be closer to geographical citizen wants and needs, and to do it faster. 
Consider a federated model - but such a catagloue needs to be granular and provide direction to users
Need to imporve communication and intergrate levels of government 
Ensure regionally relevant open data and info
Partnership agreements so that citizens do not have jurisdictional confusion
Clearly communicate to citizens various jurisdictional responsibilities
More joint collaboration between the three levels of government 
Metadata standards for groups - leveraging existing conferences and groups
Work with other levels of government
Challenges within government agencies , social organizations and associations. 
Digital preservation strategy
Harmonize access to information legislation across jurisdictions
Consistency, standardization of data sets and metadata
Direct open data to citizens based on topic of interest like budget and climate
Available as data only and as visualizations
Ensure data is made consumable from and to many sources, and made available to developers, offer websites, etc. 
Allow for, consider crowd-sourcing data - encourage a feedback loop. Standardization is key. 
How to balance the release of good quality versus data by default
Demonstrate the portal's utility as a source of data
Budling of data by topic area e.g. home or environment 
Governments should mirror the level of government that is leading edge in its approach to policy implementation, e.g. aborginal issues can be directly jurisdictional leading to miscollaboration.  Quality of life, public landscapingJohn Wooden, UCLA basketball Coach - "Good teams are not concerned about who is credited with success" 
Create common platforms for all levels of government. Can they be hosted by other organizations with same back-end but personalized by institution or jurisdiction
Better communications
Digital literacy, develop support and commnications tools for this
Conduct targeted engagements - What do specific groups want to use? Not just a blanket ask. 
Expert Panel - SME experts
Engage in citizen science on issues people care about like the enviornment, water quality, air quality, bird count, 
Open information should be made availale via more channels than just portals, e.g. google by using appropriate metadata. 
Behavioural culture will shift if challenged continously without political interference. Senior management buy in is ABSOLUTELY ESSENTIAL for change
Comits dusagers/communauts de pratiques. RT: Communities of practice/ user committees.
Mise en place de comits dusagers par thmatiques de communaut de pratique. RT: Put in place user committees separated by theme from their community of practice.
Occasion accs aux bonnes personnes de chaque organisation/ secteur. RT: The opportunity or chance (to have)- access to proper individuals from each organization or sector.
Crer une interface entre les municipalits, plus de la standardisation. RT: Create an interface between municipalities- more standardization.
Simplifier le processus, trouver une manire de sinterconnecter entre organisation. Cela permettrait laccs  la bonne personne. Actuellement, les demandes daccs  des donnes doivent tre approuves  plusieurs niveauxprocessus trs longue. RT: Simplify the process, find a way to make connections between organizations. This would allow access to the right person.  In reality, the access to information / access to data requests must be approved at different levelsand the process is very long. 
Code postaux- Canada Post. Rough Translation: (RT) Postal codes- Canada Post.
Changer les perceptions. Plus penser  la notion dargent, bnfice  contienne mais plus en terme de gain capital intellectuel. RT: Change or challenge the perceptions. Dont think any more about money, but more in terms of advantages that would include intellectual gain.
Visualisation des donnes publies. RT: Visualization/ display / viewing of published data.
Plan de gestion des donnes. RT: Management/ strategic plan of data.
Comment les donnes sont rendue disponibles (expertise pour comprendre, mtadonnes/ format normal). RT: How data is made available (knowledge in order to understand, metadata/ normal format).
Catgories, utilisable, autre standards des donnes. RT: Categories, usable, other standards of data.
Prsenter les faits simplifis: utilisation de donnes, points de vue diffrents. RT: Present simplified facts: utility of data, different points of view.
Plans de gestion des donnes par nouveau projet de programme. RT: Management/ strategic plans of data per new program project.
Rendre les donnes accessibles (metadonnes claires, formats des donnes accessibles. Excel plutt que RDF ou CSV). RT: Make data accessible (clear metadata, accessible data formats. Use Excel as the standard, rather than RDF or CSV). 
Mettre un lien avec les utilisations, par exemple: rapports existants, sommaires etc. RT: Put a link in between different uses: existing reports, summaries, etc.
Meilleur intgration entre gouvernement. RT: Better integration within government.
Ne pas ngliger limportance de la majorit silencieuse. RT: Do not neglect the importance of the majority who do not voice their opinions/ are silent.
On doit tre cratif  dans la manire de prsenter linformation, diversifi linformation. RT: We need to be creative in the way we present information, and it must be diverse.
format des donnes. Accessibilit. Rough Translation (RT): Format of data. Accessibility.
Community champions? How do you make data relevant to citizens?
Need education on concepts.
Provide guidance and interpretation for data (financing, tools for other to analyze and interpret data).
Involvement of higher education/private partners in maintenance over long-term.
Could the government play a role in data literacy?
The culture of civic and digital literacy needs to be cultivated. 
Improved communication/ publicity around tools offered, for example: 'communities' feature on open.canada.ca
How do you frame questions in a way thats genuinely relevant to people?
What about people that cant access consultations? Who cant reply online to a survey? Theres inequality in that.
A publishing platform for online dialogue.
Even though online consultations have a strong risk of missing people, they have an ability to scale that in-person workshops cant achieve.
To focus-group the information and questions youre giving people.
The possibility of, choosing your own adventure so people could choose the depth at which they wanted to participate in an online consultation. From brief questions, to really detailed feedback.
OG is important on a person to person level: when you see peoples passion to work together and learn, to solve wicked problems  this is a different way to connect with people.
Engaging Canadians and prioritizing of government spending (through ability to vote on projects)
Iterative process, rather than just one input and one output.
Pick the issues that are more controversial and harder to solve: these are the type of things that could benefit from more information and dialogue. Emphasis on social issues?
How to reach marginalized groups, young people, rural, low income level etc.
Often, need to have a way for people to visualize things, and how it actually affects their lives, pitch data into an idea thats personally relevant to them.
Blockchains are free, public, open source. Financial transactions are available for everyone else to view. There can be private (closed) blockchains and public ones.
OG allows different levels of government to share ideas, data and source code; learn from each other
Federation between provinces and feds to ensure continuity  crime, education, roads, health care. 
Culture shift: take steps in the next 2 years  the agenda for discussion with premiers (education agenda). Society to change vs. government. 
Open access/healthy democracy  this is a great step in a long term project
Electronic platform for budgetary oversight in Parliament (creating a tool that would facilitate this process for our MPs).
Endorse the Declaration of Parliamentary Openness and determine the appropriate mechanisms to move the agenda forward within the House of Commons.
Open parliament network  looking to see OG apply to Parliament
Concern around the sustainability of OG work in the long term. Recommendation that it should be connected with heritage organizations for continuity. The information lifecycle is very important. 
Whistleblower protection- legislation- based on recommendations. Information Privacy Commissioner Report.
Open dialogue: whistleblower legislation so that people feel comfortable coming forward. 
Feedback and assessment of if data is actually being accessed- Assessment of audience and potential uses.
Theres a disconnect. Interviewing people who uploaded datasets to the open government portal. He did it because they told him to. No one else was using it he thought it was useless.
People within government that are sharing data may often not know how that information is used, and that its actually useful.
How can you make the system more demand than supply??
Consider the format in which data is published- .csv or .xml.
Are datasets being versioned (go back to older datasets).
Block chain provides ability to secure data integrity, and verify if it has been modified after the fact.
How is data generally aggregated? Can individuals in marginalized groups find the information that pertains to them?
Are we tracking who stakeholders are for specific datasets (can affect level of detail required)?
How to make sense of all the data, make it possible for it to be analyzed effectively.
Data quality with the following dimensions: structure- availability, standardized, timely, real-time (contextual). I.e. online surveying of how users want data presented.
Substantive conversation (when people raise concerns & take time to inform the government of opinions, how do they feel heard? What do they get out of it?).
"Potential 2016-18 commitment to meet with a cross-section of youth advocacy groups roughly biannually to develop and implement a GC-wide youth engagement strategy tied to citizen engagement writ large. Some of the groups who were really interested in our work on open gov
the National Youth Leadership and Innovation Strategy
Open data enforces a discipline on government on how we collect and manage our data. This makes things more systematic and collected or shared in ways that companies can use. From a consumption standpoint, it was felt that we need to help the public to understand and use aggregate data. 
Building better literacy-- people need to understand power of data, how they can use it-- to support solutions.
Participants would like to see a website with activities, training and webinars to help build that data literacy.
The federal government should help build data literacy and capacity in smaller regions. Open Data 101  help by making data more visual and accessible. 
Federal government could build capacity especially in smaller regions-- hard to find data analysts-- working with First Nations to understand own learning.
People can take control of the narrative this is an opportunity for groups to make their case, based on the available information. This is a chance for people to know whats happening and raises the level of informed discourse. This allows for debates on facts, instead of just opinions. 
There was a feeling that there is always more data than you have the resource to get the data released. Making information available without facilitated interpretation  it may be more efficient to release as it is done; possibly not perfect but available. 
" Great work!
Any progress on the consideration of open source software? For example, source code could be added to the list (e.g. datasets, digital records and source code)?
If we search ""Canada Open Source"" in Google, the first result points to this idea submitted as part of the Action Plan 2.0 Consultation : http://open.canada.ca/en/Open_Source_Software
Lot of great comments and the response from the OpenGov team was:
Formalizing our approach to the use of open source tools through Canadas Action Plan on Open Government is certainly an option that we will explore.
Some departments have already established guidelines to using and distributing open source tools; this could be scaled up.
 
Thanks for any info you can give us
Shape policy to ensure that the public good is central to benefits  that accrue through opening government information and data. Recognize that  there are both benefits and dangers to opening up government data for  commercial exploitation. For example, in opening up government data to  commercialization, there is a potential to shift from free public services to  for-pay commercial services. Take action to make sure that this does not  happen. Suggestions for action: 1) do not allow private services to interfere  with free government services (e.g. paying a search engine to have private  services developed from free public goods appear before free government  services should be illegal); 2) insist on quid pro quo, i.e. commercial  services from free public goods should at minimum provide free basic service  - this would require a modification to the open government license, which is  advisable in my opinion; and 3) ensure that private interests benefiting from  free public goods give back to the public good through taxes. The global  nature of the internet means that this would take an international effort. I  would love to see Canada make good use of our leadership in open data to push  for this.
"Thank you for holding the Open Government session last evening, it was nice to hear from the different perspectives and also the opportunity to network.  

A little background, Im the manager of the Service Innovation Team within the Service for Business Branch at Innovation, Science and Economic Development (ISED).  My group is responsible for the online delivery of two multi-jurisdictional initiatives designed to help support Canadian entrepreneurs to start, grow and comply with government rules and regulations.  
We are consumers of Open Data as we need to leverage these components to create an integrated service for our business clients.  

One of the main reason for attending last nights event was to see if there are opportunities for groups like ourselves who do not own specific data sets to contribute to the Open Government initiative.  What we can offer does not fit into the current definition of Open Data.

My questions are:

1. Are there opportunities to expand the scope/definition of Open Government to include a new category called Open Services?  This category would include pre-packed web services/widgets that will extend proven client centric functionalities to partners serving the same clients.  Similar to Open Data, there is no effort required from the consuming partner to manage the raw elements that enable this functionality.

To date we have 3 widgets (1 production ready and 2 in beta):
 NAICS keyword Lookup  Provides a user friendly way for businesses to selfidentify their industry sector through the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) (e.g. can replace free text fields or long drop down list in forms when asking businesses to self-identify their business sector such as tax, Import/export forms  and it can help searches where business identify their sector to narrow down the search results) 
 SGC Lookup (Beta)  Provides fast look up of municipalities, regions, cities etc. by leveraging a common keyword thesaurus to help standardize client entries (e.g. can be used for clients self-identifying which jurisdiction they belong to in a form or from a client interface)
 Federal/provincial/territorial Program Search (Beta)  Extends the financing search capabilities within Canada Business Network to third party websites to quickly customize a search for government programs and services (e.g. used by organizations that may wish to customize the program search results based on audience, jurisdiction, types of financing and purpose of financing)

We have plans to build a predictive engine for the CBN to pull related customized information for clients this year and once developed we want to create it in widget form so other organizations can leverage it to support their services. 

In addition to the above widgets, we also offer access to the asset building blocks (e.g. program summary descriptions, blog articles, topic pages) of the Canada Business Network website through an API with a structured definition to help content consumer better understand the context of the metadata tags.  We currently syndicate CBN & BizPaL content to provincial partners to support the content within their respective portals as well as to private organization such as YouInc.com, who re-purposed CBN blogs as they developed their portal.  In this case, the API would not fit under the category of Open Service.
"2. From an implementation perspective, will the plan include a level of detail that calls for standards on making open data sets/API/Extracts more user friendly?

The biggest challenge as a consumer of Open Data is the absence of insight into the challenges of those wishing to use data from the authoritative sources.  Aside from which technical format is best suited for the various types of content, theres an absence standards around metadata documentation.  For example, the content creators or owners need to approach classification from a non-GoC perspective and providing supporting documents to give the consumers a chance of understanding why data/information has been categorize in the manner it is presented.
"
"3. One of the biggest hurdle to Open Government is cultural shift at all levels of government, has your group thought about how you will break the impasse between the mandate and resistance from individual product owners?  How can Open Data exist when Stats Canada has a cost recovery model?

Ideally Open data should come from the authoritative source, what if the authoritative source is unable or unwilling to open up their data?  What guidance can you provide to organizations that are willing, have the ability and access to free (Public Works buy and sell data) or purchased (Stats Canada) data?  Do they have an obligation to move forward on an interim basis to make the data into a consumable format and publish it as open data?  If that is a possible option, what type of mandate coverage is required to move Open Government forward (e.g. working with authoritative source, copy right, communication etc.)? 
"
Improve the governments capacity for open dialogue (e.g. more meaningful dialogue with stakeholders, permanent forum for improving open dialogue, improve user experience on consultation sites, archive comments received, report back on how public feedback is incorporated into policy)
Use more open source software and share open source code with Canadians (e.g. provide high-level direction to departments on the use of GitHub / open source software)
Develop clear policy around the preservation of digital material (e.g. work with libraries regarding archiving practices, establish specific retention and disposition policies for open data and information, require data and information to be released in machine-readable formats wherever possible)
Reinforce parliamentary transparency (e.g. publish data on all donations to MPs, prosecute legislators who break the law, regulate against the use of omnibus bills, require MPs and MPPs to publish daily schedules)
Improve digital/civic literacy and access (education and training for both the public and government employees on using data effectively, supporting more widespread access to the internet, build capacity for open data in Africa, provide points of contacts for all departments) 
A LOT of public money goes into research and development -- which is not available to the public (who helped finance it). This is outrageous! On one hand this system forces the public to subsidize the profits of private companies or individuals. Unfair! And on the other hand this privatization of knowledge slow down research and development, in the name of private profit. Not smart! Humanity has benefited from shared knowledge in science for centuries (peasant knowledge to improve crop varieties, mathematics, biology, astronomy...). We have strayed too far from the ethics of shared knowledge.
"BACKGROUND Inventions are key to society. They lead to innovation and progress, which in turn help improve our quality of life and well-being. Thats why the government of Canada invests a substantial amount of money in research and development by funding its own science based departments and agencies as well universities and industry through various funding programs. As a result, the Canadian government is the source of many inventions developed in Canada.
But what happens to these inventions then? Typically, inventions are handled with traditional intellectual property management approaches: trade secrets, patenting, licensing and transfers to industry. These methods have their roots in a strong belief that the socioeconomic benefits we can derive from inventions will be greater if their ownership is kept private and exclusive.
On the other hand, history has shown that inventions that are freely and openly available can have significant socioeconomic impacts: X-rays, penicillin, the Internet and the World Wide Web to name a few. None if these key inventions were patented.
THE PROBLEM Current Open Government and Open Science efforts do not propose mechanisms to pro-actively set government inventions free. The open publication of scientific articles describing an invention and the release of associated scientific data are a step in the right direction as they inform, often in a detailed and exhaustive way, of the nature of the invention. However, these open approaches do not permit the use and the deployment of the invention by others. This ultimately results in reduced dissemination of government inventions and slower progress for our society.
THE SOLUTION Under the new Action Plan on Open Government 2016-2018, an Open Inventions initiative would propose strategies, policies and tools to support and foster the pro-active release of government funded inventions openly and for free. To achieve this, tools such as an Open Government Inventions Portfolio, new departmental intellectual property policies and a standardized Open Government Patent Pledge would be developed to constitute the required legal foundation.
In a way, the proposed Open Inventions approach is to government funded inventions what Creative Commons is to copyrighted works and what the open source software movement is to software."
"I am writing on behalf of Canadian Journalists for Free Expression, the Canadian Association of  Journalists, Newspapers Canada, Fdration Professionnelle des Journalistes du Qubec and  the Centre for Free Expression to follow up on our February 17, 2016 letter to your office  regarding access to information reform.    

The letter expressed our desire, as organizations with expertise in access to information, to  meet with you to discuss the elements essential to effective ATI reform. We are encouraged by  your commitment to engaging with civil society to shape the Action Plan on Open Government  201618, and we believe our organizations can help. After many years of neglect, Canadas  access to information system is in crisis. As you have rightly said, our country deserves a more  open and more accountable government, and updating the Access to Information Act is a vital  part of that initiative.    

We would like to reiterate our request to meet with you at your earliest convenience to discuss  specific  ideas  about  how  to  reform  Canadas  access  to  information  system.  We  will  follow up  with  your  office  in  the  coming  days  to  explore  dates  that  would  be  possible  for  you  to  meet  with  us,  and  look  forward  to  working  together  to  explore  ways  we  can  make  access  to  information reform a reality. 
"
"Excited by Donald Trump and Randall Munroe's Thing Explainer, a book that lots of people like, I suggest that when government talks to people with written words, they add a few lines of words using a smaller set of English/French (like the top 1000 words that people use, and some other words for government) The idea would be to make sure politicians and civil servants speak in a clear and forced-simple way.
(1) new custom code whose development is paid for by the Federal Government be made available for reuse across Federal agencies; and
 (2) a portion of that new custom code be released to the public as Open Source Software (OSS).
"
I completely agree with this. One additional criteria needs to be added, however. Code that is released by the government should NOT have to be translated into both official languages. Instead, software with comments in EITHER official language should be released as soon as possible. All Federal government releases are currently mandated to be in both official languages. This policy has the unintended consequence of slowing down public data/code releases. An anecdote: I used to work at Statistics Canada and officials there withheld open-sourcing software only because the lead developer worked in French and her comments in the code had not been translated to English. This was nearly a decade ago and the code has still not been released.
Fully support opening of source code produced by Government for the general welfare.  In many cases, public release of code is a win-win cost-cutting measure, in that sharing of code is about reducing the burden of development for the government, enabling collaboration with private sector, other levels of government of even internationally.   When we share the code, we share ideas, more people contribute and it makes it easier for everyone.
Open Sourcing as many public information systems as possible is the only way to keep our information sovereignty while building a strong computing knowledge in Canada.
"Emulate the Government Digital Service's Design Principles, especially the last point:
""We should share what were doing whenever we can. With colleagues, with users, with the world. Share code, share designs, share ideas, share intentions, share failures. The more eyes there are on a service the better it gets  howlers are spotted, better alternatives are pointed out, the bar is raised. Much of what were doing is only possible because of open source code and the generosity of the web design community. We should pay that back.""

This is excellent, and would be such a valuable change  both to empower federal-level public services, as well as provincial and municipal public services that could benefit from shared open source tools and resources.
There is a balance between making data open and the cost of making data available. Do not design to have all data open. Logically clarify what data needs to be open based on priorities.
Thanks Bruce. Clearly making things open has a cost. Decisions will need to be made about what is practical. However, if governments start with a "Share first" approach when beginning new projects then the costs will be reduced.  Furthermore, how many datasets within government are already duplicated because of existing silos?
The government should collaborate within itself and with external parties to figure out how to engage in meaningful public dialogue leading to citizen collaboration and empowerment. This work should be done and reported upon transparently.
I just "voted up" your idea. A good way that the government can engage in meaningful dialogue is to provide a guarantee that submitted ideas will be stored/archived, kept live online for use by the public and social networks, retained for future use by government, forwarded to the appropriate government institution for review, addressed and responded to by the responsible Minister, or group of collaborative Ministers/Departments, to confirm if they will be working on implementing the ideas being submitted during this Open Government Consultation process. That is aside and in addition to the official Action Plan on Open Government 2016-2018 that is suppose to be published on July 1, 2016.
The government should participate in, and support a Canadian multi-stakeholder forum on Open Dialogue with  a broad membership that includes civil society, business, citizens, academics etc. One task for the forum would be to come up with a scheme to evaluate government's engagement efforts.
Among the 16 submissions, 10 requested a centralized database of the mandatory reports and 6 requested a machine-readable reporting template. The motivations for, and benefits of, these two recommendations are described in detail in the submissions, so I will not repeat them here.

I have not been able to determine whether these two recommendations have been taken forward or responded to. I therefore suggest them for inclusion in the National Acton Plan.
Ask Canadians what they consider vital web services and add them to the Open Government Portal. I consider geocoding one such service. Most data has a spatial component in the form of an address. By offering a free, national, geocoding web service whose responses are licensed under the Open Government License, that address can be turned into a geographic location which can be displayed on a map and subject to the full range of spatial analysis tools. For example, an Apartment Rental Finder website can take addresses from landlords, convert them to geographic locations, and display them on a map to prospective tenants looking for rentals in a given area. Existing free geocoders dont have authoritative data and are too restrictive in their terms of use. Commercial geocoders are so expensive, they pose an obstacle to innovation for Canadian web developers.
Open Dialogue  Attendees were generally excited about the consultations on AP 2016-18, and were interested in participating. Many noted the important new opportunity of having a new government in place, which may open the door to initiatives that were previously perceived as off-limits
Open contracting  OK CEO Pavel Richter, in his video message welcoming conference attendees, noted that Canada is very highly ranked in the world (through OKs Open Data Index) in terms of the openness of data on government spending and contracts. Other conference attendees echoed this message, noting that GC data on contracting was more timely and of better quality than many other governments in Canada and around the world.
"Proactive Disclosure  There was great interest in the consolidation of PD information. 
Expectations will be high for this new tool, and some participants expressed interest in seeing additional PD requirements (i.e. new types of data and info required)
"
IM Checklist  Speaking from the government/recordkeeping perspective, some attendees (including colleagues from Canadian Space Agency) noted that there should be a kind of IM checklist to ensure departments are fully aware of their IM obligations in a very easy-to-understand way. Depts and agencies do not wish to purposefully withhold or mis-file information, but when there are multiple avenues of recording and publishing info (LAC, Canada.ca, PD, OG portal, etc.) it can be complicated to remember who to submit which info to, when and how. It would be better to have a checklist or flowchart (if this type of info, in this type of format, then submit here, here, and here)
One attendee provided a presentation on open government in Francophone Africa. In conversation, he pushed for Canada to do more to support open government in la Francophonie. He noted that, for a number of reasons (historical, political), the Government of France is not well positioned to provide support and capacity building in Africa. 
The Government of Canada on the other hand is well regarded and could play a significant role in advancing openness and transparency among francophone countries, particularly in the developing world.
There was some discussion among attendees about the apparent divide between English and French open data communities. There are rarely bilingual events (most often one or the other) and the two communities seemingly focus on different priorities and ideas. The Government of Canada could have an important role to play in bridging this gap.
There was some discussion among attendees regarding the implementation of open by default as a truly fundamental principle in the way government works. One attendee suggested there should be a kind of race to the top  for example, could the GC or the Gov on Mtl become open by default first? PERSONAL INFORMATION REMOVED noted that there are no defined success metrics for open by default  its an important principle, but there does not seem to be a clear end point at which a government could truly say we are open by default. Attendees stated that they themselves want to be the judge of openness, and noted that for them open by default meant feeling that their input could be easily heard, and that they could easily and effectively communicate with individual public servants on the data they publish or work on
One thing per bill ( no more Omnibus bills).  Yes, this will cost more but (unlike self-serving ads, figure head governor general office, the Senate ...) those dollars have a direct benefit to the taxpayer who has to pay for the change being contemplated. Each bill should have an estimated annual cost attached to it so everyone can look at it and decide if they want their (non-whipped) representative to support it on their behalf.
Firstly, all information held by the Government of Canada and Parliament of Canada should be open by default, with certain specified limitations to protect: the personal privacy of Canadians; national security; safe disclosure intended to protect the health and safety of Canadians. Secondly, while individual Canadians have an inherent right of privacy, businesses and corporations do not. Any business or corporation wanting to do business with the Government of Canada or the Parliament of Canada should be prepared to accept openness and transparency in the expenditure of taxpayer dollars, or not bid on government contracts. Specific trade secrets may be protected, subject to the authority of the Information and Privacy Commissioner. Thirdly, Crown Corporations and other agencies, boards and commissions at the federal government level should be subject to the same openness and transparency as the Government of Canada proper, with the same limited exceptions as described. Finally, Canadian citizens, acting as private individuals, have the right to free and open access to public information. Professional journalists, registered lobbyists, agents of non-governmental organizations, and others acting on behalf of an association or group, may be asked to pay a nominal fee to defray the costs associated with information requests, provided such fee does not pose a deterrent to making such requests.
"i find it a struggle to know what my MP or MPP is actually doing  - by doing i mean helping citizens put forward legislation and participating actively in doing so -- my my riding in Barrie, ON - i have a PC MP -i would like to see the calendars and diaries ie meetings and activities of all elected officials to be on line thru their office sites - how do i know t-hey are really too busy, or out of town - too often it seems like make-work or no-work activities are the rule and stop citizens from getting political action and help i would like mp's to do more than tell citizens to do the work for them - and not make it impossible to effect legislative improvements by telling citizens they have to do all the work via petition and organization of public outcry (which is what happened to me in Barrie)'
with MPs who can ignore us, we have no control over our  rights here - some examples of elected officials who ignore citizen outcry are the Alberta government's official response regarding a suffering animal in the edmonton zoo, which has roused pubic concern- that official responded to the public by saying 'their hands were tied' (not true), they ' could not interfere in this as it was between the zoo and the city of edmonton' (not true), with the caveat to readers to 'remember that the edmonton humane society may be able to do nothing as the city of edmonton is one of their biggest donors' --- this is a perfect example of what has become  very common MP behavior and obstructs democracy.
other - the public should have current and advance knowledge of all trade negotiations and pacts with time and means to participate.
"
"Canada was one of the first countries to include an Open Contracting commitment in its 2014 action plan. Public works has published a pilot data set using the Open Contracting Data Standard (OCDS) and Treasury is working on implementation of Proactive Disclosure policy but it would be great to move toward sustainable, timely, standardized open data about this important government function. It would be great if the next NAP could commit to full implementation of the OCDS (as Crown Commercial Service in the UK has done in the new UK NAP). The plan should also focus on user engagement and innovations in civic technology to ensure that this data can be used by Canadian stakeholders.

If fully and properly implemented, this means that Canada would be one of the first countries in the world providing real time, joined-up open data on its public contracting.

This opens up a world of possibilities both for better civic engagement, provision of better information on opportunities to smaller business, and better government analytics for saving money and boosting public integrity. To its great credit, the City of Montreal is also publishing open contracting data.

It would be great if the NAP also committed to cocreation of advanced and shareable analytics to better meet user needs, especially with helping smaller businesses win more contracts, and share better impact stories.
The quality and fairness of contracts and agreements awarded to private firms will be improved by ensuring that the key terms of the contract be made available to the Canadian public. A law preventing contracts from being sealed from public scrutiny will help ensure that fiascos such as the Highway 407 ETR contract being awarded to a Spanish consortium for 99 years under terms that I can't see, or the agreement that allowed US Steel to buy Stelco that they are now in the process of walking away from leaving pensioners high and dry. As a citizen of Canada, I also signed that contract! Why can't I see the terms?
All the contract data at the federal level is already released through the Contract History dataset: 
If this idea is developed into a commitment, then with respect to the disclosure of oil, gas and mining contracts, I recommend consulting with Publish What You Pay Canada and the Natural Resource Governance Institute . For disclosure of contracts in general, I recommend the Open Contracting Partnership. To document concerns of commercial sensitivity, I recommend the Canadian Chamber of Commerce, which is already familiar with open data.
As the director of PWYP-Canada, I must stress the importance of contract transparency. Contract transparency allows citizens to monitor and provide oversight for the implementation of contracts between private firms and governments, particularly in the natural resource sector, but also in other sectors. When we speak of contract transparency, we are referring to the disclosure of the original contract in full. Provincial securities laws in Canada already require the disclosure of material contracts for mining companies, without significant concern for commercial sensitivity. In addition, the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative, of which Canada is an important supporter, also includes requirements for contract disclosure.
Private Sector companies should be able to register to have their products and services available to all 3 levels of government. The current process is far to labour intensive.  Get products and services registered, at low to no cost, so that the Public Sector is aware of what is available so they can buy vs. build. Once products are in a government catalog, departments can sue various criteria to develop their short list.
"For a government to be truly ""open"" and transparent then it must allow all of its citizens to have access to all of the governments business. There should not be any secret or ""in camera"" sessions that citizens cannot view. That is how the government is kept in check.
Canadians should be able to access government spending by department and down to the pencils and paper. That also should hold true for all members of the government. And along that line there should not be any ""Petty Cash"" funds as all financial transactions should be able to be scrutinized. When the government commits to a contract, that contract should be reviewable by the citizens of Canada for scrutiny to ensure that tax dollars are not being wasted or misused. In today's computerized world it is now possible to do all that was mentioned previously. The government should have its own ""cloud"" of data centers to allow easy access to the data. My idea is that if the government is truthful and has nothing to hide then there shouldn't be any reasons to not allow the citizens of Canada to have access to what the government is doing. And in regards to being open I would like to see the government publish (through the newspapers) the agreement between US Steel and the Conservative government that has allowed US Steel to not meet the requirements laid out that allowed them to purchase the old Stelco in Hamilton/Nanticoke. An open government would provide that document/agreement without a second thought otherwise it looks like the government has something to hide.
""I would like to make a couple of suggestions.  
First, to raise awareness for and make Open Data a greater priority, might the Federal Government deem public data as a form of infrastructure?
Second, many of the most valuable public datasets are under the control of the provinces and municipalities.  I would suggest that the Federal Government consider putting in place an incentive to encourage provinces and municipalities to surface datasets under their control. 
"For open government you could start by reversing you decision not to enforce accountability from these two groups.
In the very early weeks of your mandate you choose to remove requirements for native bands to report how their federal government granted funds are managed. They refuse to account but yet want more. If they are deserving of additional funding, fine, as long as they are publicly accountable.
Same goes for the unions. Every person paying union dues has the right to see how those funds are managed. Can't believe removing this necessary transparency was such a priority for your government.
To truly enhance Canadian's awareness of extractive spending, the reporting must be transparent and accessible. That has to mean searchable material, centralized and accessible. Public awareness of the existence of this material is also crucial, and PWYP's proposed methodology would enhance Canadian's confidence in the process and product.
The purpose of ESTMA is to enhance awareness by Canadians of how extractive sector revenues are spent. But this goal will not be achieved if the mandatory reporting  by companies is not done in a way that is transparent and accessible to Canadians. The data needs to be in a searchable database and in an open and machine readable format. These are important and non-onerous requirements that should be supported and implemented by our Government.
It is vital that revenue payment data provided by extractive sector companies be easily accessible to all stakeholders. Ease of access will allow better analysis for all stakeholders, including the Canadian government itself, which will help in uncovering problematic tax arrangements and corruption in host countries.
The current law would be better labelled "The civil servant's guide to deny the public's right to know". Any reform should put the emphasis on how government information must be released, not offer a litany of reasons/excuses for preventing it. This particular suggestion is just token reform as it allows the institution simply to cite the section of the law - how could that ever constitute a meaningful "explanation"? The civil service should not be tasked with reform of the current Act or process since it makes no sense to ask the same civil servants who have an interest in frustrating access to information to come up with reforms on how to make it work. Too much conflict of interest at play here!
"9. I would also like to add a word of caution. While the idea of open data/information is immensely powerful and promising, please consider that information (data, code, and its relating technologies) are completely value-neutral, and that we share this new well connected world with players who do not necessarily have the Canadian public's best long term interests at heart:
- Would you be able to shut down or disable some of all open data sources or government APIs if necessary without shutting down the country?
- How would you know (and convincingly demonstrate to your citizens) the continued integrity of data and/or related services?
- What measures could be put in place to protect the selection, availability, and integrity of such services and information from political interference when factual or scientific data conflict with political ambition or convenience (think: decision based evidence making)?
- What measure would be put in places to assure your citizens that use of these public resources poses no risk to their own liberty and freedom to express their dissent or to seek out information and use information in a way that could be seen to challenge their government (think: profiling based on open data access)?"
Yes.  Monitor for harm caused by intentional or unintentional abuse resulting from the ATA. Every wrongfully treated person spawns many, many others who will go from being dedicated to the welfare of Canada to possibly the opposite.  At the very least it creates unrest and needless loss through the ripple effect.  Apply the intent of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms in every case and error on the side of humanity. 
 The last thing we want is to allow our security services to be seen as equivalent to the enemy they are in place to protect us from (for their sakes and ours).  We are Canadian...let's behave that way.
Of course any new issue or concern that develops before that time should be brought forth to the department head best suited and in charge of that particular issue, who is also familiar with the reporting process, to any ministerial department or agency involved in the process or thought to be a contributing player, or the public can also inform government through social media networking, community participation, voluntary contributions in the name of public interest and safety since and engaged public is a necessary component in the process. 
Yes.  National security organisations work best in the public light.  The most effective intelligence agency in US history has been the Dept of State Bureau of Intelligence and Research which operated with 500 staff and working off open sourced material.
Perhaps a set of rules about parliamentarians' personal relationships with people in the agencies they are tasked with overseeing.
departments in Canada using 'stingray' technology to swoop cell phone date even though this has to date been unacknowledged and is in legal grey territory.  This is just an example of different departments at different levels of government infringing on our Charter rights and this should not and cannot become the norm.
In my opinion, a commitment is not legislation requiring review. So therefore, obviously, I think that review timelines need to be legislated to fully ensure thorough reviews are completed regularly and reports given to the Canadian People.
Yes we have many immigrants from countries with known extremist terrorism presently and we need to be a lot more complete in who is allowed in Canada . The legislation on terrorism is not very effective with convictions . 
I don't think Parliament should make laws that bind future Parliaments.  It is constitutionally possible, but when a review of existing legislation needs review cannot be decided in advance.  In the Canadian system this is really a decision for ministers in any event.  If more access to Parliamentary review is thought necessary, a better option might be to enact a provision whereby a certain number of MPs could table/support a resolution calling for one and the Government would then be required to make it happen.  That also raises potential conflict between the House and Government, but so do the existing statutory/mandatory reviews.
It is long past time that Canada had a new Privacy Act, once that has been drafted in the Digital Age and is aware of how much more important it is that Canadians' privacy be protected. The current Privacy Act was originally drafted in 1985 and should be rewritten from the ground up. In particular, the Privacy Commissioner should be granted more teeth to crack down on serious violations of the Privacy Act.
Even better than statutory review would be a sunset clause that would terminate the legislation (and what it authorizes) until and unless a new bill is enacted.  This has been done in the past, to the benefit of all Canadians.
This legislation should be cancelled and just make criminal law the vehicle for violence against people. Eg. We were assaulted this year, it will take 10 months for this to come to court, meanwhile the person is walking around at least till then. More worried about crime in our own population.
"Both the United Kingdom and Australia have a third institution dedicated to national security accountability: independent monitors of national security law.  
These independent monitors are non-government lawyers with a part-time, statutory mandate to issue reports on government performance under anti-terror law and who are entitled to see secret information. But even more notably, they have also examined the necessity and usefulness of existing anti-terror laws and respond to requests to examine law reform in particular areas, creating a considerable volume of independent, thorough, and public expert policy analysis. This material has then figured prominently in subsequent parliamentary deliberations on anti-terror law. Retaining a reviewer of this sort to perform a special rapporteur role in offering expert input would contribute subject-matter expertise to the CoPs work, and also that of regular parliamentary committees performing more classic legislative functions.
We are aware that some will criticize the addition of a monitor as duplicative of work done by a CoP and expert reviewers. But if the UK and Australia have seen the need for the three forms of distinct review, we do not think that Canadas security & intelligence apparatus somehow needs less review than those very similar democracies. 
Moreover, one would think that Canadas existing review bodies would assist in policy deliberations by offering their views on the merits of law projects or policy proposals. SIRC once did this in the 1980s, during the mandatory five-year review of CSIS.  That tradition now seems to have waned. With the exception of the Privacy Commissioner, review bodies are extremely circumspect, even ambiguous, in opining on law projects. This may reflect the fact that because they hear complaints, they view themselves as quasi-judicial, and therefore are reluctant to participate in policy making. It may also reflect the effect of operating in a security intelligence community whose culture is not conducive to the open expression of dissent from government policy. 
The net result is that a lot of expertise on policy matters is never communicated to executive government, let alone parliamentarians. Even if review bodies were able to discuss secret issues with a parliamentary committee empowered to hear such information, this would not necessarily translate into a more forthright discussion with review bodies on the legislative policy implications of these issues. Rather, the conversation might focus instead on the more micro-operational matters scrutinized by the reviewers.
A monitor would resolve, in other words, key deficiencies not fully addressed in any other way.  First, this independent monitor may overcome problems of complexity and scope in national security law. With a wide-ranging mandate, an independent evaluator will identify lacunae and difficulties that might otherwise escape the attention of parliamentary committees, and place them on the official agenda. We are often struck by the independent legal expertise that is available to many of the UK parliamentary committees (although unfortunately not the specialized UK Intelligence and Security Committee). 
Repeated annual or special reports by an independent monitor also militate against the gradual normalization of national security  and especially anti-terrorism -- laws and powers. In other words, it guards against the prospect that these laws will fade from media and public consciousness and lurk below the radar screen in Canadas statute books. Anti-terrorism provisions  especially those in C-51 -- are radical enough that they should not be under-scrutinized. This reporting may also galvanize more regular (and transparent) policy-thinking within executive government, as it appears to have done in the United Kingdom.  UK government responses to its independent monitor have produced a corpus of documents and discussion papers, many of which are much more informative than the guarded government reaction in Canadian legislative proceedings. Reports by an independent monitor could also assist civil society groups in this legally complex area. We note that there are reasonable disagreements in many areas of national security and research has confirmed that there has been productive tension between the recommendations made by the first UK independent reviewer and those made by parliamentary bodies. 
An independent monitor might take some of the high (and low) politics out of parliamentary deliberations on anti-terrorism issues. If empowered to comment on proposed law reforms, a credible, independent evaluator should be difficult to ignore, or paint in a partisan light. 
An independent monitor would have to be cognizant that his or her participation in policy debates did not detract from other duties. In this vein we note that the UKs current independent reviewer, David Anderson QC, has been able to comment on proposed investigatory powers bills and also commented on aspects of 2015 legislation and the British Prevent program for countering violent extremism, although we are also aware that neither the Australian or British legislation provides monitors with explicit powers to comment on bills. We recognize that there may be some risks of such comments, especially if they amount to pre-approval of laws the monitor might then assess.  We consider, however, that the benefits of informed criticism outweigh these risks and that a monitor could still conclude that even properly worded legislation has nevertheless subsequently been administered improperly. 
Moreover, a stable system of expert, parliamentary and independent monitor reporting, coupled with executive response and parliamentary examination, might generate a more generalized expertise in the area of national security law  so long as the government both promptly release and respond to reports from all three review bodies.  Ideas would be tested and debated in public venues, potentially allowing rapid, but reasonably carefully-vetted, responses to crises that might emerge in the future.  
Policy actors (well-apprised on the legal and policy terrain by the expert policy review) might have the capacity to focus not simply on hot-button issues that arise in legislated responses to crises, but also on the more detailed and complex issues that may otherwise escape scrutiny. The result may be parliamentarians -- with their democratic legitimacy --- possessed of the expertise that is required to question executive-driven security policies.
The creation of an independent national security legislation monitor, capable of supporting the work of the Parliament, the National Security and Intelligence Committee of Parliamentarians and the expert review body.
1) We need to fix our democracy by fixing election and voting procedures so that they are more fair and representative. Corporations/lobbyists should not have a stronger vote than citizens when it comes to making decisions that affect us all. If a decision needs to be made that will affect one business sector but benefit all citizens greatly, then that decision needs to be made even if a sector of our economy may have some difficulty. For instance, carbon taxes or environmental practices around oil are important aspects of everyone's livelihood that are more important that the bottom line of some businesses. They will be able to adapt and perhaps the government can try to help them adapt - but we should not be intimidated by these kinds of decisions. Coercion from lobbyists should be illegal and investigated more with bigger personal penalties.     2) We are now in the age of misinformation and in order to have an open government and well-functioning society, it is imperative that we address the "fake news" as well as the decreasing quality of reporting being done in our country. Objective journalism needs to be better supported. Perhaps having an independent licensing body govern who is considered a "licensed journalist", with some kind of exam that includes ethics, etc - as well as repercussions for "malpractice" (I'm thinking someone similar to what doctors have). If they get their license removed then they cannot consider themselves a journalist and cannot claim that what they are saying is "news" or "journalism". That would make it a lot easier for regular citizens to be able to tell the difference between real news and fake news. Of course, fake news cites can just call themselves writers or editorial writers or something, but at least they can't say "journalist" and as a reader I know what to look for.     3) Make being a citizen more simple and open. Instead of having disadvantaged individuals jump through hoop after hoop to apply for a large variety of social programs (which only further disadvantages them), have one application that is simple and includes all potential benefits (this may be better done with a basic income of some sort). Indeed, this will also be solved if government departments can share information with each other so that time and money isn't wasted on coordinating it all - or at least having one citizen file that all departments can access (or something more secure but just as simple). Including getting involved with government decisions in this process so that if something is happening that I want a say in - I can easily find this information and properly inform myself as well as easily implicate myself and be heard. I should have to jump through a million hoops just to get what is legally my right as a citizen - everything should be as open and simple as possible (which will improve productivity overall and not waste anyone's time.    4) Address income inequality by closing real taxation loopholes. Most individuals do not have the knowledge or money to work the stock market, so a lot fewer taxation privileges should be given to individuals who can. Generally, making taxes a lot more simple - so that again less fortunate members of society don't have to jump through hoops just to understand their taxes let alone get them done. The wealthy have all the resources to help them find taxation loopholes and programs that they can benefit from and the poor don't even know of tax relief programs let alone have the time and money to take advantage of them.    
I am most concerned with the dilution of Canadian traditions and the rights of the Canadian Born . We have built this Country on Christianity and yet it is being pushed out in every way. I welcome other faiths but not at the expense of mine which my family fought and died for.   My grandchildren have to listen every morning to an apology to the Native peoples during their opening exercises and this is wrong. The issue has been carefully studied, monies paid, reconciliations ongoing. In doing this we are setting aside the child of the Native community again and making them different. They are being made to feel outside by this practice.   I welcome other traditions but at some point they came to Canada to escape the horrors forced on them and yet they want to bring those very traditions to Canada. My example is the covering of a muslim woman. They are not religious tradiitions  not in the koran (sp) but rules made by men in their country to suppress women.   I want to see the education of the immigrant carefully assessed. We have doctors driving trucks when we have a shortage of doctors. People should be assessed and used for their ability to enhance our society and their lives.  Immigrants should not be all allowed to congregate in the main cities. This just makes the habits and gangs and such easier to establish and their children never are given the opportunity they came to Canada for..   Those who chose terrorism should never be allowed back . They are responsible for the death of innocents and some of those were Canadians or the families of Canadians. Why should we "re-integrate" them at expense that could be used to help others and get our vets off the streets and treat their PTSD when they chose . There are consequenses for choices made.     And finally female genetalia mutilation is torture and anyone coming to Canada should know this is not acceptable . The Ministers need to rethink this one.       On a positive : after studying the new Physician assisted suicide law I was delighted to she  Minister Gladhu have her bill passed for hospice and palliative care. The government needs to look at the wonderful service provided in Sarnia Ontario at the St Joseph Hospice. Every City should use this model of caring and peace.  
Open government also means keeping pace with digital evolution. In order, my priorities would be:    1. Safe-guarding Canadians' privacy and legislating human data mining and digital tracking/surveillance. Being clear about what protections are in place so Canadians know their rights and ensuring there is strong punitive action for those who abuse access to such information. Also, not allowing international companies to store Canadian data outside of the country, where it cannot be safeguarded by Canadian laws.    2. Increasing transparency regarding lobbyist actions (both on a macro and micro level, e.g. social media flooding) so Canadians are informed about what is happening. Enacting legislation that safeguards Canada from lobbyist activity originating outside of the country. On a local level, implementing more stringent requirements for feedback process that only allow affected residents (not large companies) to provide input into decisions that have local impact. Making hearings accessible to the general public with evening sessions and not allowing developers to push through zoning changes during daytime work hours when the majority of residents are unable to attend.    3. Updating Canadian legislation as it pertains to image consent to keep pace with easier access photography and video as well as digital enhancements (such as facial recognition) that put Canadian privacy at risk. Protecting Canadians, especially children, from having their images published without consent.    4. Increasing transparency of police/RCMP directives and ensuring majority of efforts are placed around crime-prevention activity rather than increasing revenue (Enforcing motor vehicle laws is important but sitting in an unmarked car in a school zone an hour after school ends when no children are in sight makes the public question police motives and negatively impacts public confidence).     5. Lastly, expanding CASL legislation to include mobile texts and new forms of digital marketing. CASL legislation has made me more often to signing up for marketing emails as I now feel more confident that I can request to remove my name from a mailing list at any time. Unfortunately, CASL has not stopped the SPAM texts I receive through my mobile device.
I live in downtown Toronto and have for the past 15 years and the last five years especially since things have been privatized in the last decade construction sites have never been so slow and spread out. There's absolutely no reason why construction sites should stretch over tens of kilometers with no one working on it for months at a time the same goes for schools and hospitals and all kinds of construction that get started and never finished. When I complained to local government they point the finger at everyone and don't make a phone call to try and say that constituents are concerned and get these projects under way in fact they say there is no time limit on construction permit and the fact is money is being wasted even if it's just on cones and Equipment sit on used in the rain and weather being wasted. So it's obvious that corruption and inefficiency is at at its highest and when a concerned citizen like me actually takes the time to write a letter I am completely dismissed and treated like a crazy person no wonder half the people I know don't want to bother voting. A friend of mine and planning says that it's because the government is forced to take the lowest bid and then when these Shawty companies go to do the job they start it and then tell the government they can't finish it they need more money and that is why all these sites are stalled I miss the days when government employees were paid a fair wage to do a good job. And I miss the days when politicians who are paid to represent their constituents actually did so. The treatment that I received the last time I wrote my MPP really made me question if I should even bother anymore and this is from someone who really cares and is involved in their community. We are not supposed to be seeing apathy and corruption reign in our public services. How can we possibly ask a Community member to stand up and take the time to do something when they do so and they're completely dismissed by their political representative who is supposed to advocate for them?
major reduction on borrowing money from world banks. Elimination of extravagant government spending in areas including but not limited to foreign policies, charitable donations (why we are donating to highly controversial clinton foundation and other scandalous entities.) My children will be paying for these gross expenditures for a very long time. there needs to be a voice for the citizens on major decisions such as carbon tax which has absolutely no scientific evidence to back its merit and makes absolutely no logical sense on an environmental standpoint when a better alternative would be to limit imports from countries with very poor environmental policy until they can raise standards. makes about as much sense as fighting oil pipelines being built to our industry standards and environmental requirements when our only other alternative is to purchase oil from countries with very little to no regulations. these policies do much more damage to our world then would be done if we were responsible with our own resources and would greatly benefit our economy while keeping finances out of the hands of groups out to eliminate the first world. less taxes make for a much stronger economy and result in much more government revenue in the long run. less government agencies eliminating many unnecessary public sector expenses. there needs to be more private sector jobs then public to even have a sustainable economy but this seems to be a widely ignored issue in our government choosing to increase taxes and create new taxes in an attempt to cover these excessive expenditures. Our current government acts like my ex wife with an unlimited high interest credit card borrowing money to satisfy their need to appear better.
Treat people fairly and stop adding taxes just for the sake of adding taxes.  Why not look at cutting taxes to grow the economy?  Think of JF Kennedy.  I work hard have a family of 5 and still I'm expected to dish out extra money for those who chose to be less fortunate....exactly it's their choice to be on social assistance.  My child benefit tax has been taken away, my monthly income for my kids has been take. Away and I'm expected to support Canadian who sit at home watching tv and home when their kids arrive.  So, why don't I stop working and take on this role where I can be home for my children, not bounce between day cares, rush to make dinner and do homework?  Where is social assisatance and work if able to programs?  Why am I suffering by paying more taxes and having less time with my chi,drew and meeting ends meet so another can sit at home and get a free pay cheque?  Granted, my income would be much lower, but I'm sure the tax breaks and governance t funding would satisfy my needs and allow me to care for my children.  What you've done is created a lazy society and make those you have drive and success to pay for it.  So what's in it for me?  Nothing but more taxes and less time with my family.  Fix the progra, fix the social services and make it fair.  You are only encouraging pay outs and I'm honestly considering leave my job.  Some context, I have 3 kids under 13 and feel it's not worth double income  because you make it harder for us to advance, take more taxes, and my kids suffer because of your lack of innovative thinking.  Wake up!
no one held accountable for government employment programs that don't follow through. Example: Women in Transportation program offered through Microskills in Scarborough. When it came time for the in-truck training of 8 weeks, suddenly they claimed funding ran out. Meanwhile their Annual General Meeting document specified they had funding for the program for the next 2 years. So much time wasted waiting for program to start, doing the in-class training. Why they proceeded to cover the expense of the physical for AZ and getting the Z schooling in Oshawa at the trucking school and exam is beyond me. Adding Z to my G license doesn't get trucking jobs or an A license. All that time I could have been looking for a paying job! To tell us 2 weeks before the truck training was supposed to start that suddenly the program can't continue is unacceptable. There needs to be accountability! What are they doing with the money??? It seems that as long as the government sees Microskills having people come through their door, they'll keep getting funding. But if they don't finish the programs they're offering, then someone is pocketing the money. A lady that worked at the driving test centre in Victoria Terrace location said Microskills pulled the plug on her Women in Construction program earlier too. The government is wasting a lot of money on programs that don't deliver and do more harm than good. Please follow up on Microskills history. The lady that used to run the Women in Transportation program when head of the place on Consumers Rd location in North York when I was there. 2014 I believe. Thanks. 
Wasting tax payers money on projects that costs millions of dollars without proper multiple consultations, surveys, etc.  The information received to move forward on these projects (eg.. power plant scandal) should be shared with the public.     Adhering to government policies and procedures when Councillors or government officials decide to allow a 24hour, 80 bed mans homeless shelter in a 1 block radius of families, beer store, park and injection site, without proper community consultations.  Harsh penalties or the withdrawal of the project should be implemented and enforced.      Myself and many many people feel when government officials are caught in unethical scandals, a more severe punishment should be handed, including jail time.  Lower and middle class people work very hard and have to trust the officials to handle our tax dollars truthfully, effectively and honestly to keep our country thriving and secure.    Immigration protocols need to be re-evaluated and stricter protocols need to be in place.  In the Beaches, Leslieville, Riverside community, TB is becoming a problem because east asians are coming into the country with bought chest exams to indicate they are healthy, as per hospital data and shared information.  This is only one of the security measures put in place that is not effective.  I am sure there is no way to determine if an immigrant from a terrorist country is harmless.  We need very strict guidelines and revision of customs boarder and immigration training.  We already see many issues starting to occur in Canada.     
I'm very concerned about the lack of federal statutes compelling employers to properly fund pension plans that they have committed to maintaining for their employees and the lack of federal statutes to protect the funds held in employee pension plans. Funds in employee pension plans (both those contributed by the employee and those contributed by the employer) should not be considered to be an asset owned by the company.  Once an employer establishes a pension plan for their employees the funds in that plan should be held in some type of trust and should not be available to be claimed by creditors when a company experiencing financial difficulties or has filed for bankruptcy.  By allowing creditors to grab these funds we cause extreme financial hardship to individuals who are at a stage in their life when it's unlikely that they'll be able to generate any alternative income sources to make up for the loss.  This hardship has a cascading effect on the economy due to these individuals reduced buying power over the entire duration of their retirement years.  Additionally the financial hardship imposed on these retirees will likely see them needing to turn to various government programs such as GIS and OAS that they might otherwise not have had a need to call on and this places an unfair and inappropriate financial burden on the citizens of Canada who through the payment of various taxes fund there government programs.
gov. spending -gov. telling Dr. and canadians how much they can earn when we had no say in their raise-why we have no armed forces, England being smaller then us and yet having a larger armed forces then  us, our gov. buys their junk- great subs right. Maybe we should send our smarties politicians over there to learn how to run a country.- It's a shame Mr Trudeau didn't let us have a say in the refuge matter seeing,s how we are probable still paying for them and what a kick in the face to our immigrates who have study our laws and ways for months and years and there still trying to become a Canadian citizen, and what about our homeless who have lost their jobs to modernization and our country who lets these companies out source our jobs with no punishment to the companies. I served in the R.C.N. 63 to 68 because I was proud to wear the uniform and proud to be a canadian but not anymore, I believe the only reason people are in politics know is for the money and benefits not because they want to serve their country. I'm a 71 year old retiree who will have to sell his home soon because property,house and car insurance and utilities.I made more money then both my parents put together and they lived better then I am know. I guess by know you can tell how much I think of our leaders........... One broke,busted and sad canadian                              
"Fairness, the ability to report harassment issues after the 12 month period, the ability to be heard in discrimination cases without them being brushed under the rug like Statistics Canada did just recently to me and to plenty of other ""term"" employees over the past several years - especially people with a disability. I worked with Stats Canada since 2009 as a term until Sept. 30, 2017 (non-renewed while I was on LTD from motor vehicle accident on way to work (using Para Transpo taxi)  - I should have been made permanent 3 years after I started .. but because of previous work-place accident 2013 - management would not provide resources to me (i.e. training or refer me for other opportunities to further my career in government because I was not the ""right fit"" - remember I have a disability since 2013 accident). they keep getting away with this and making people feel terrible and have no job security - they get rid of term employees and hire casuals - this is not right!!! Federal government needs to wake up and see the depression and mental health issues they cause by doing this. 
*****Personal Information Removed*****. It is pathetic that I have to fight for my job I did nothing wrong except be on disability leave while trying to heal.  Please change the 12 month period to special circumstances and have the employees be heard. "
First, I want immigration concerns looked at, as they affect other aspects of Canada that are important, such as health care, home affordability, and wages. Canada does not need to bring in elderly immigrants who have never contributed to our system to suck up pensions, health care, and other services/benefits available to Canadian citizens. I want new immigrants to be properly vetted, and add to our country, not make it unsafe and un-Canadian. I am tired of TFWs skewing our labour market, making it difficult for Canadian citizens to attain employment and driving down wages. Capitalists love the free market, except when it comes to the labour market, then they want to interfere with supply and demand to drive down wages and favour corporate interests.   Second, I want to know what the government is planning to do with traitorous Canadians who fought for terrorists regimes such as ISIS/ISIL/DAESH. Other Western societies in Europe are not attempting to reintegrate these vipers into their midst, they are all terrorists with the potential to harm Canada and Canadians. They should never be allowed back into Canada, nor should their spouses or offspring. The risk to society is too great to allow these supporters and dealers of terror into our midst. If they are stateless, so be it, it was the choice they made.
I think open government means transparency in what the government does. That the people taking care of the country abide by the rules of the country also. Even if it means paying taxes on all their money, including the off shore stuff. I also think the government should be doing more for indigenous peoples of Canada. It's nice to bring others to Canada but lets look after who lives here first. Bringing people from horrible conditions feels good but the northern reserves have horrible refugee camp conditions also with no water or contaminated water and poor housing. I would like the government to use it's money like it was on welfare not eating from a golden spoon. There is too much waste. Stop changing names of departments uselessly as that is a waste of taxpayer dollars. Also what about the middle class with no children? They do not get any breaks on taxes or any extra money in CCB or GSTC so why should they be happy about the budget and other government initiatives. I would also like to see a report on the spending of the government and what has been delegated to be spent and where. It is unfortunate that people in this country go without housing, health care, food, and basic necessities but Canada goes to great lengths to provide for other countries and look good in the media.
Open forums - seeing Q & As other people post (as they agree to share publicly) is also helpful.    Uncensored public comments - the CBC recently took away ability to post comments, following comments on language problems in NB - that is censorship - people should be allowed to comment on and even criticize public policy, even relating to human rights or language policy, as long as the comments do not promote violence or hate.  Otherwise, if we can only agree with public policy, we have no voice at all on these issues.  Some language policies, especially as applied in NB, amount to unreasonable, unwarranted and unfair discrimination against people who only speak one language fluently.  Bilingualism has become a discrimination in itself - the "right" to have bilingual public service has gone beyond functionality and into prejudice against those who aren't fluently bilingualism.  Bilingualism has become a qualification that overrides ability in many cases, where it would be possible to have English, French and bilingual positions in fair proportions to the language of the general population I.E. 60% English population, at least close to 60% English public servants.  Presently 30% French population often means 60-70% bilingual (first-language French) public servants.  
We need to look after Canadians first, our Veterans, give them their lifetime pensions if medically released, if we don't look after them for all they have done how do you expect the next generation to want to fight for us? Our elderly, to many barely get by month to month, you want to keep them in their homes as long as possible, provide the services they need, make it easy to access, most are not on the computer so need actual people to go out and inform them, make accessing all seniors benefits and programs easier to access, there are programs out there that most people don't even know about that would benefit them immensely. Our homeless numbers are disgraceful, we hand over billions of dollars every year to other countries but can not feed and house our own? Our young people, how are they supposed to get a start in life? Secondary education, housing, living expenses are through the roof and climbing all the time. Secondary education should be affordable to any Canadian student, build affordable housing.. not the thousand of 400-500 thousand dollar homes that are going up everywhere. Subsidise young people to enable them to attend school or establish their business, they are the future.. if we don't hold them down or drown them in debt. 
It is 2017 and persons with disabilities are still being marginalized through inaccessible education, child care, employment, services and spaces. Not only do persons with disabilities make up a significant portion of our society, but as baby boomers age, there will be an even more significant amount of people living with disabilities.  Currently, provincial/territorial supports across Canada are inconsistent and inequitable, leaving a high percentage of folks living with disabilities also living in poverty, the same is true for families of children with disabilities as well.  Many people and government systems dont expect persons with disabilities to be able to fully participate in society, and dont prioritize access to what is needed to be full participants in society.  Even the tax credits and benefits are inaccessible to low income earners and penalize those who do earn money with regular audits.  The amount of people living with disabilities that are also incarcerated or involved with the justice system is really sad- FASD, Learning Disabilities, Autism, PTSD, undiagnosed disabilities, Mental Illnesses, etc  We can do better, we should do better and the government should be paving the way. 
I cannot over-emphasize the importance of the environment with respect to nearly all of the 16 priorities laid out in this survey. It seems almost astonishing that we can live in a world where we are truly facing an existential threat greater than that which was posed during the cold war, yet the discourse has largely dismissed any sense of concern or panic as fear-mongering or exaggerations of fact. At a certain point, the government needs to be willing to act in its citizens' best interests regardless of the impact it will have to popularity or short-term electoral outcomes.    I've seen Trudeau take such stances, at least in rhetoric, when it comes to social issues, and I generally have a favourable view, but if the environment is not treated as the ultimate, paramount priority that it has always been (but seldom treated as), I would contend that the government is ultimately failing to execute its primary purpose. So in terms of open government, if environment were to be excluded for any reason, I would want to know, in no uncertain terms, why it has taken a back seat (this with full awareness of the current initiatives being taken to mitigate and reduce carbon emissions). 
consultations must be meaningful, not just a check box.  We have to see that our comments and ideas are actually considered and reflected in the final product.  Too many decisions and too much information is hidden by 'cabinet confidence' when it doesn't need to be.  need to have true representation on government boards, committees, working groups, advisory councils, etc. - gender equality, visible  minorities, seniors, youth, indigenous people, people with disabilities, LGBTQ2, and weighted (more) inclusion of people who are directly impacted by the issue.  Need much more consultation, collaboration and co-development with unions in the development of policy, legislation, etc. not after it is already drafted.  much more open data and  more searchable data.  Downloading data into an Excel file makes it possible to do much more analysis than working with a PDF or a summary document.  The PSES survey data was available but not in a format that could be easily manipulated to do meaningful analysis.  Build this into the data collection from the beginning  with the intent that others might want to use the data for their own searches.  
Director level and above (mostly in NHQ) should be held responsible for poor decisions. Currently, they just move on to another position within government leaving the successors to clean up their messes. This includes decisions on projects as well as staffing. I've seen too many people hired for the wrong reason. Poor leaders lead to low, or non-existent morale, which leads to lower productivity, stress, and illness (short or long term). This ultimately causes unnecessary tax spending.   Several years ago the government all but eliminated positions for support staff (CR-Clerical staff) in many departments. This lead to employees that often earn much more than that clerical person having to plan their own travel, order office supplies, arranging meeting rooms, among many other tasks. The employees that were hired for a specific job were good at it which meant that they worked faster, earned less, and cost the government less to do those tasks.   I've also witnessed a Director continue with a project even with guidance stating that it violates the Competition Act as well as internal security protocol. That was disgraceful. 
With such a shortage of jobs in Canada,  and also the great need for Doctors,  and the extra help needed for the older population who are living on very low income, and homelessness,  and the problems with Drug related issues,  I think we should not be adding other people from other countries into Canada.  We need to be helping our own people more first and foremost before reaching out to others.  All things (housing, groceries, medical etc.  are rising as far as cost,  but care for our most vulnerable is not).  I also have issue with the "baby bonus"  which it was formally called.   I was began during the war to help Moms left behind to manage with the raising and feeding of their children while the men were fighting in the war overseas.  Why is it still happening?  And getting huge in amount?    Please help our most vulnerable.  Take a look at what the seniors receive and also those young people who can't work because of chronic pain and receiving early CPP disability,  and compare that amount with the cost of housing and groceries.  Add to that the "top up"  from welfare...  The ends don't meet!  
I believe that enhancing the power of local representation within the legislature is one of the most effective ways to build an accountable government. How can one party, be it Liberal, Conservative, or whoever, possibly claim to be able to represent the massive diversity of living experiences across Canada when most votes are whipped? How can a policy that is good for urban cores in Central Canada also be good for rural Atlantic Canada, the North, the Prairies, Quebec, etc.? Yet that is how parties vote. All MPs, regardless of the particular needs of the riding they represent, vote the same way as their colleagues on the vast majority of bills that pass through the House of Commons.    I think that whipped votes should only take place on matters of utmost importance to the national interest; otherwise, local representatives should be free to vote according to the wishes of their constituents. That, more than anything, would give people a sense that their voice is heard in government. Let parties be uniform in ideology, not policy. Because no one policy can possibly be good for the whole country. 
Highly political issues are not addressed by governments. The existing and growing gap between public and private sector wages, benefits and pensions has been brought up again and again - nothing is done. It is not even recognized or acknowledged. How can this be? The greatest pay equity gap problem we have in Canada is not between men and woman (a topic always being discussed), its between public and private sector employees. Why? The average private sector employee has no pension (almost all public sector employees have best pensions in the world - defined benefit), takes 70% fewer sick days a year and on average retires years later than public sector employees. This gap is unconscionable in a democratic society. Private sector employee take far more job loss risk than public sector employees yet still make less money for the same job on average. How can we have this two class system in our Canadian democracy? Why is it never addressed by politicians? To have open government, the people need to see that all animals are truly created equal and that some are not more equal than others.  
Mental illness - what is the plan of action to help those who cannot work, cannot qualify for social assistance due to spousal income(yet struggling due to increasing prices in electricity, food and mental health services). CPPD is barely accessible as it is and people with mental illness almost always get denied. Mental health needs to become a priority - many Canadians suffer from severe mental illness and are unable to get financial support due to lack of programs or even funding. Lack of funds makes the person who suffers from mental illness feel worse as they are not only unable to work but they are also unable to help financially, which makes them feel in despair even more so. This puts a LOT of stress on the primary person with income which can cause them depression, anxiety, stress and in severe cases, suicide - then you end up with 2 incapable persons. Please help our fellow Canadians who suffer from mental illness - some of them have done absolutely nothing wrong to deserve to live in their situation and are just not able to get the financial help needed... please. 
A better understanding of:  *Self-employed individuals and their importance to the Canadian economy  *Better protection for home buyers from builders, developers, realtors, brokers and lawyers. There should be limits or a set formula for how much deposit a builder can request, a mechanism in place to retrieve it if circumstances change and a set timetable and mechanism to return grading deposits to home buyers within a reasonable timeframe (within 2 years)  *Fairer tax system for single income earners, particularly those with children who now outnumber those without and who pay the same taxes as singles without children but have the extra responsibility of caring for those children  *More emphasis placed on creating equity for existing immigrants (long term immigrants who have been here 25+ years) who are still not on equal footing with naturalized Canadians, and less on bringing in more immigrants. You need to fix the problems that current immigrants are experiencing before you bring more in and create further marginalization, economic disparity, employment disparity etc.
1.  We need to quit bowing down to other nationalities and stand up for Canadian rights.  If someone wants to become Canadian, then they should conform to our standards, not the other way around. It's time the Government took a stand for Canada and not worry about the politics involved with other countries.    2.  Aboriginal issues are way out of hand.  We need to put a stop to this.  Again, time for the government to grow some balls and end this bullshit.  As an example, why are we spending so much money for Attawapiskat issues. They need to be moved out of that area, since we are wasting so much money there. Other reserves manage themselves very well, so maybe it's time to quit wasting our money on this reserve. Get them the hell out of there and to a place that won't flood all the time, and make them responsible for themselves. Quit supporting a reserve that keeps wasting our money.  3. Make government officials accountable for spending and where you find they have been dishonest or wasteful, make them pay back that money if full. Quit cowing down on that issue.  
1.  More responsible service providers/dedicated to their jobs not only on their income - like teachers, doctors, nurses and government workers.  I believe that we have to start on something we can control and for the first people who will represent the programs the government will implement.  I noticed that this is becoming a problem because these people focus more on how much they earn and not what their jobs dictate.  They should be ask why they think they should be in that position.    2. review welfare. lots of people are in the system for a long time and doesn't even deserve it bec the workers doesn't care to investigate, while the ones who really deserve it are on the street.    3. more focus on mental health.  people die, sickness spreads because of the government focus on giving them drugs rather than getting rid of them    4. more housing for low income and facilities for mental patients    5. more community involved by announcing on tv next projects and how we can participate.    like drug addicts should work - probably clean the streets or plant trees.
1. Create more opportunities for people to tell their opinions about various processes, such as immigration, Canadian culture, language, education (cost and affordability), etc. The process should be eased for people with various backgrounds. For example, this survey is online, but Canadian population is aging and many prefer using phone, TV or radio interaction. Also, young generation often is detached from the government, and it may be a good idea to create/promote existing social media platforms. They provide instant review of opinions, etc.  2. Create a possibility for people, who are immigrants-to-be (i.e. people who hold study or work permits and super-visas), to give their opinion too. There are so many people like this in Canada, and they cannot directly impact the government decisions and participate. Yes, they are not Canadians, but they are still a bulk of Canadian population and may bring reasonable ideas.  3. Provide more opportunities for Canadians to react on refugee policies and procedures. Report both positive and negative results on that matter.
It seems that we as Canadians only seem to find out after the fact that our Canadian Government is working to help "former" terrorists reintegrate back into society when our laws are very clear about penalties for being a terrorist.     We as Canadians give a lot of aid to just about anyone who puts their hand out. This is not the beer store!     We are told that we are so highly taxed because this is a big country with relatively few tax payers as compared to the U.S. I totally understand that, so stop giving away so much.    This country is in debt, the average Canadian is in debt, and some, like myself are wondering where our next money is coming from (self employed) so that we can keep from going under.    I don't want to make this personal because I like our current PM, but, I think that he should be a little less "Rock Star" on the world stage and be a little more "PM" back here at home where we need him to make Canada a better place for Canadians.    Please stop giving our money away, we really can't afford it anymore.     We aren't that wealthy anymore.
Let'a be inclusive and respectful of ALL citizens .. however, let's remember the founding principles Canada was built on. Let's respect our forefathers and those who died and are still fighting for those rights. At the same time respecting others, let's remind them that THEY have chosen to move/immigrate/come to Canada and it is their responsibility to respect the founding principles of this country and not expect Canada to change constantly to meet their demands as the want to integrate And insist we recognize as a nation their cultural traditions. Canada ... stop sitting on the fence and trying to please everyone and be globally inclusive of everyone's cultural traditions. Stick to your roots!!   Great to invite immigrants etc to enjoy their cultural traditions and invite everyone to their festivals to learn about and appreciate. If we went to their countries, they certainly would not be changing all their laws and cultural foundations to aquiese to our demands. When you choose to go to another country, you adopt the traditions of their culture.  
Working for a healthier Canada is my priority. This is multi-faceted. On an age-adjusted basis (not because of aging) Canadians are becoming less and less healthy. This is impacting prosperity and productivity, and costing us trillions of dollars annually in health care. Human health is also reflected in environmental health. Related, there are important environmental contributors to human and ecological health, and I have strong reasons to believe that the frameworks for decision-making are not working. Canadians need to see the real data - the evidence - to inform and inspire necessary changes to agriculture, industries, technology, how we are building and living ... all aspects of daily living and bigger decisions alike will be impacted. Canadians deserve broader considerations of potential harms and alternatives to common products, technologies and ways of accomplishing goals. The private sector will be informed and inspired to solve important problems only when they can see the data. Citizens will only support changes when they see the data.
Currently the Disability Tax Credit has been cut back by Revenue Canada.  This happened in May with people with Diabetes and Mental Health conditions being denied, when they attempted to renew.  The biggest challenges is these people have had the DTC for several years, have invested in a RDSP and now, their RDSP is going to have to be returned to the government a year shy of being vested.  It is almost like Revenue Canada planned on the 9th year of the RDSP to start denying people so all the grants obtained did not have to be payed out.  In addition, these long time people on the DTC, who have conditions for their life, such as Diabetes or head injuries, are constantly having to renew every 5-7 years instead of being permanently approved.  All have doctors support, signatures and meet the 14 hours/3 days a week life sustaining therapy or the 3x longer 90% of the time being affected, but NO, the non-doctors at the CRA still deny these people and say what the doctors write is not correct.  That is not a transparent government.
1. First Nations and other powerful lobby groups, seem to have major influence on long-term government decisions. The individuals in the organizations rarely, or simply did not participate whatsoever, in Canadian support of world wars or major conflicts and support efforts. My grandfather, father and uncle risked their lives, witnessed horrendous atrocity and suffered PTSD for the rest of their lives, along with other Canadian men and Women, to secure our nation's future, Strong and Free. Without question they're "turning in their graves" with the sad state of affairs with ill-thought, short-term/vote-seeking government leaders.    2. The Federal and Provincial law enforcement agencies, as well as other agencies such as the BC Review Board, are virtually unaccountable for their actions. Dozens if not hundreds of violent criminals avoid conviction or are granted early release, putting hard-working, tax-paying law abiding Canadians at risk every day. We're living in a country where self-defense and vigilantly are a reality.
I would like my voice to be heard as a Christian woman, I feel my current government does not represent me at all. From those in the Liberal party having to be "pro-choice", breaking down the definition of marriage and allowing families to decide how to raise their children. I am not represented, as one who speaks up for those who cannot, like a child in the womb who can be murdered (by a Doctor who took an oath to protect and do no harm) at any point during pregnancy in Canada. To lessoning money given to families so that one parent could stay home & raise them. To the definition of marriage being changed. Trying to legalize marijuana, and selling it as a voting point during an election speech at a high school. To trying to remove protections for clergy who offer hope & love to our communities. General moral decline that I have seen in the last number of years. A prime minister who cares more about marching in a gay pride parade and defacing our Canadian flag with a rainbow, than hearing the voice of the unrepresented. 
Employment opportunities in the country for the next generations - this must be considered when the government is preventing oil and gas exploration.  There has been so much time, money and lives spent to forage ahead with this industry that to stop it this appears to be closed minded and lacking in consideration for all the families who have set up their lives thru this industry.    The entire carbon tax issues has been taken too far.  No matter what Canada does, it will not improve the world for anyone - it is such a small insignificant amount of carbon that we generate this again appears to be a case of jumping in without due consideration being given.  If all the coal mines in our country are shut down - what will that really do to the world?  Other countries, with less environmental concerns than Canada are opening more and more coal mines and these will have a far greater affect on the world than our mines, which have been providing energy for so many companies who will now have to pay much more for energy.
The major difference point on open government is the underlying theory of what the relationship of the populace to the government is: the approach that I (and some others) support was described in Theodore Rave's paper "Politicians as Fiduciaries", Vol. 126 Harvard Law Review (January 2013). The different and sometimes opposite view is Pluralism, recently advocated by former PM Joe Clark and recently by former Governor General David Johnston. I disagree; the government must be open and accountable to the majority on each individual issue; as opposed to accountable to different organized social groups. The closest we come to a real implementation of the latter is the Crown's fiduciary duty to aboriginal peoples under some constitutional provisions, but that should not be extended beyond that point. Pluralism, to the extent that in Canada we should recognize it at all, is primarily the duty of the federal system as containing provinces, that are to a greater and greater extent self-regulating and self-governing.
1. The public needs to have greater exposure to the interaction of lobbyists with government officials at the highest levels. There is too much direct influence (behind closed doors) of strong lobbyists with a view to shaping government directly to their interests which may not be in the best interests of all Canadians and often, regular Canadians or the environment or science lose out.    2. Paradoxically, there is not enough ability for government departments to directly work with small business to propel them forward with timely economic assistance and other support measures to make them grow from start-ups into strong and prosperous business entities. This is because there is too much concern about treating all Canadians fairly and having openness and accountability when administering government programs. This becomes a severe impediment to helping out small businesses who need easier ways to obtain financial/funding assistance and quicker approval processes. Some balance on this topic must be struck. 
1) -Not having a Govert leaders & their wives spend tax payers money on personal vacations, clothing, shoes etc. Hold them accountable every day of their term!!  2) -A spoiled, privileged Prime Minister who doesn't understand what its like to make a choice of paying rent or buying food, or heating bill to pay has no what "The People" Want or Need!!!  3) -Canada is made up of alot of diverse Provinces, Dont forget about the WEST!!!  We are hurting & all we get form our Govrt is increased taxes & as an added bonus of a new carbon tax!!! which is ridiculous as they are killing the oil & gas sector which inturn is killing Us in AB & they have no alternatives inplace to make up for the lost revenue & jobs!!!  4) -Then with all the job loss, in your infinite wisdom you decide to dump off over 22000 refugees in our province with no money or jobs that we in turn have to support by way of our TAXES!!!  They get more money & advantages than anyone born here!!! WTF??  Shouldn't we look after our Own First??!! 
The problem is large company/foreign industry lobbying stating they create jobs so they should get tax cuts, but the fact of the matter is that the middle class is shrinking drastically caused by corporate greed and manipulation of government. the Federal Government should increase taxes on large corporations and regulate the market to insure everyone can afford basic necessities, increasing access to affordable internet plans, cellphone plans, cable plans, housing, food, etc. The Food industry pushing sugar filled food to Canadians, while even the EU and the USA have now regulated the sugar industry including sugared cereal and trans-fats. They threaten to leave to cut job or leave Canada, They wont cry over a couple more % off the top, and if they do to bad for them, Canadian Entrepreneurs will fill the markets demand creating better paying jobs, with better benefit and job security. Small and local business is what make a community thrive, but that doesn't mean we have to oppose globalism. 
- decision making that is not always consistent with long-term objectives and sustainable/progressive outcomes (e.g. short-term savings that are not sustainable, decisions that do not take into account negative impact on service or timeliness of service, decrease in productivity and/or unrealistic expectations based on resources, decrease in quality of service/work, lack of consideration for other non-monetary and not easily measurable/quantifiable parameters related to decisions taken but that are critical factors to success or directly impact results/outcomes, etc.) .  - short term outlook/decisions that is/are driven by other than strong, effective and efficient outcomes for Canadians (i.e. driven by short-term objectives and goal to spin positive scenarios, data mining, political or party gain, election results or vote garnering, personal gain/benefit, etc.).  - lack of strong accountability and/or monitoring of effective results for groups/sectors receiving government funding/resources.
"We have the following additional issues:  1.	We believe it is of the utmost importance that the government adopt significant amendments to the Access to Information Act. The proposals in Bill C-58 are grossly inadequate, failing even to include the governments proposed fast track reforms, let alone the real reform needs to fix Canadas broken access to information system. This is a major priority for us.  2.	We also call on the government to move forward with dispatch to implement reforms to the Income Tax Act so as to restructure the rules governing charities in Canada. The government has committed to this and the expert report was released some time back, and is largely in line with what the non-profit sector has asked for. It is now time for the government to introduce legislation to put these changes into effect.  3.	A number of countries are moving ahead with regimes that require companies to disclose their beneficial ownership. We believe that Canada should also do this.   "
the priorities (previous) question is not clear to me or perhaps I've misunderstood the point of open government. in my view, open government is about transparency and accountability (both touched on in this survey) however in the priorities question you include issues that I do not think belong there like environment and medical care. If you want quality data from this survey, I would recommend splitting those priorities into open and overall because feel like open government is a priority amongst those others and then within open gov't what is important should be ranked, like the impacts on trade, contracts, decision making, contact with citizens, etc. Anyhow, my answers of the overall priorities of government include 1) healthy Canadians and supporting our public health care system 2) renewable resources and clean energy/environmental protections of natural resources 3)responsible government with integrity, that is transparent, conscientious and Cdns can be proud of
"   I'd like to see a secure Federal and paperless Epost through Canada Post that supports delivery of all your confidential  mail to ONE inbox address.     Have an address that's unique for you, and each Canadian Citizen, whether it's connected with a S.I.N. number or some other Government I.D.  
*****Personal Information Removed*****    It would minimize Email Fraudsters, Secure and minimize Wrong Physical Addresses, Wrong Person, my house burnt down, I have no secure physical Address, My mail hasn't come in weeks, etc etc.     It's in your Canada Post E~Post    It seems strange with all these businesses Securing their sights and this and that, yet they're destination is to send it to some Joe Blow Email Address? Who is Hotmail, or Gmail, or Google, when it comes to Federal and Provincial Government Mail?     Legally our physical Mail  is Sent Canada Post, and has been, since 1867. Why wouldn't our Confidential Email also?!     Thanks, thats all I have to say!   "
While openness to a degree is good, government cannot be paralyzed by ill-informed public opinion. Policy makers should be careful about the SOURCE of their information - that means giving more weight climate scientists than lay people or industries when talking about climate change, but also giving more weight to the opinions of indigenous people on indigenous issues than non-indigenous people.     Policy makers also need to make an effort to combat the active campaigns of misinformation and lies. While it may seem more dignified to ignore internet or media rumours and lies, it's dangerous to allow these to fester. Conspiracy theories about Muslims, free speech and sharia law -- some of which have been endorsed by members of parliament! - contribute to hate crimes and violence, including the massacre in the mosque in Quebec.     Ill-informed opinion drives global warming.  Lies and slander fuel Islamaphobia and anti-Semitism.    Not all information is equal.
We need an open platform for decision making based on innovative technologies like the blockchain.    The current structure of government leave too much slack for human abuse of the system and the decisions   taken by the government in power are not always reflective of the way Canadians feel about a situation.    The blockchain is technically auto audited by the people at all time.    If we could make a decisions voting platform for the people of Canada by the people of Canada,  not only would we save millions in government logistics but then we would have no one but our self to blame if there is something that doesn't work.    This way instead of throwing blame around in every election and just wasting our money doing the same mistakes over  and over again. we could actually work to bring Canada to its best potential.    I say the best potential, not maximum potential as we want Canada to be a great place to live not just a production machine.  
Start at the inception of life, provide opportunities for children to be born in a healthy environment and build a "no fail" environment where all children are given their birth right to develop into productive and healthy adults. Unfortunately, some children are born with physical, mental  or genetic challenges, are we as government ready to provide them the help that they need to achieve a quality of life  with the capacities that they have. Look after children, so that they can become the next generation of productive citizens. Encourage corporation to adopt children from low income areas through their life spans so that every child including those born in affluent neighborhood have a mentor so as a community we can see them grow up to be becoming tax paying citizens with a chance to be educated, able to earn and lead a healthy life...so this needs a life long partnership with corporation who have to put in a plan for children to have a job
Take better care of Canadian veterans and low income people in our own country, It makes me so sad to see our own people starving and barely able to feed themselves or get medical attention they need and yet our own government sees fit to keep providing aid globally without taking care of their own. Don't get me wrong I believe in helping others but not at the expense of ignoring our own. It makes me sick when I see seniors barely surviving and yet I know for a fact that a person who came into this country I believe as a refugee, and within 5 years of living on her Government assistance, she owns her own business, and owns her own home. Again, I am glad for her, she does work hard, but she had all of her schooling (English language) paid for and living expenses given to her. But why then are our soldiers coming home from peacekeeping missions, with terrible PTSD and very often forgotten??? This is wrong. Please help our own as well as others. 
you people in government have or suppose to have the people of Canada intrest at hart rite were does the fact and did honestness  become your number one priority .now Canada is wakeing uop with the rest of the world and are realiseing that WE ALL BEEN DUPED AND THAT THE RICH AND THE GOVERMENT HAVE BEEN STEALING AND BY BRING IN MArytime laW AND GOUGING THE MIDDLE CLASS FOR YOU OWN BENEFIT ,MY SUGUESTION IS SIMPILEY BE FOR THE PEOPLE Addmit what this government is doing aswell as the past goverments had done since 1972 and be a part of the greatest contry in the world that easy we all no that all it take for every thing in Canada to be paid for requires only 4percent of the yearely income'but we areuin debt but are we really I think all citisens in Canada are coverd under the bankruptcy of Canada and its eleagle to proceed with whatb are government has done to the Canadian people by stealing the rites rite out of the parwents hand afort profit 
Fixing the tax system to be more favorable to all Canadians.  Getting rid of useless tax credits which all Canadians need but because they aren't able or have the time to go get the proper receipts they are losing out.  Increase the basic exemption for seniors and get rid of the credits which are too complicated for seniors to understand and be able to claim.  Nursing home, Attendant care, medical expenses, Caregiver.....everybody needs these in one form or another.....why split and make these so complicated for the most vulnerable????  Try to simplify things...and educate employees when dealing with taxpayers.  The Federal government has been reassessing a lot of individuals without even contacting them to see if what they are doing is correct???  I have had to contact the government  several times to tell them that the reassessment they have issued is wrong and the income they are adding is already reported and clearly indicated... 
Different branches of the government are not communicating clearly or at all.  I am currently of work indefintely and on a 6 month wait list for an MRI, 1 week if I'm willing to pay out of pocket at a private MRI clinic. I find it very hard to believe that it's more cost effective to let me sit a home and get paid as a government employee as apposed to my benefits paying for a privater MRI.  I believe if there were better communication between the branches of government this would not be the case.    The government needs to look at the true costs of people off work for extended periods of time as apposed to offering medical services in a timely manner in order for people to return to work sooner.  I am only one case that is costing the government money on a daily bases due to lost time a work.  All total I'm sure getting proper medical care to allow people to return to work sooner far out weights the cost of timely medical care.
I'd like to see courageous innovations in vote reform as well as localization of decision making,  including formal capacities to include First Nations, Metis and Inuit in intra-governmental decision making.     While nascent, blockchain technology might afford very interesting new possibilities for distributed, local referenda and secure transmission of franchise for local governance.    I would like the government to consider, courageously, the model of democracy expressed by infrequent mass vote counts as only a first step in realizing democratic vision. Let's not get complacent. Co-operative structures represent formidable expressions of local democratic governance when it comes not just to decision-making, but actual engagement with, commitment to, and responsibility for those decisions.    In short: please consider what it would mean to facilitate citizen investment in local, shared, values-based outcomes and initiatives.
The previous question only allowed for three priorities. Many could be summed up in the initial three but I would add to them.  More effective and efficient transportation such as Public Transportation in cities, especially the NCR/NRC, working with industry to reduce pollution and especially with over packaging and use of plastics  Language requirements being relevant to the work  Less language discrimination having the most qualified person for the job  As a public servant being able to identify and report on ineffective management without fear of reprisal  With the level of terrorism around the globe, feeling that Canada is prepared and ready to defend our country  Promoting Canadians and Canadian business, big and small to have Canada be self-sufficient, working together to preserve our beautiful country and live wherever we want not just in big cities to find employment - growth and preservation of "small town" Canada   
 Getting government departments to share information could not possibly happen soon enough. Bouncing between departments or sections and not knowing who to talk to for answers about key services that affect quality of life is horrible. Better UX = better positive experience = better public feelings toward government. So improving UX of services would be top priority for me.    ATIP legislation. Please don't mess with that. Make it good. If you're not able to proactively disclose everything (recognizing progress takes time), at least make information available and accessible to those who are requesting it so they can hold government to account.   I indicated Healthy Canadians as a priority; mental health specifically would be a high priority, especially as it relates to work, be it lack of stable employment or pressure at work contributing to poor mental health, or mental health conditions being highly stigmatized.
With the minimum wage going up, all other goods are also going up and it's not fixing anything. People who make more money need to be taxed more(even a small percentage more) and the prices of goods needs to stay the same or go down now. Getting out of poverty and having affordable housing and hydro is almost impossible when everything continues to rise. It's not helping anyone. People like me who would be considered to be in poverty are STILL suffering.  Also the legalization of marijuana should have been left to the distributors who were already open and set up. Instead we are spending more government money to have the LCBO regulate it and open other stores. Small businesses could have thrived but now they have been forced to shut down and cost of living is rising. I don't even participate in any use of marijuana and I am disappointed in the outcome and the loss of economic possibilities. 
True and lasting reconciliation with respect to Indigenous and Non-Indigenous peoples including wampums, treaties, self-determination and land claims.  Decision making based on enhancing environmental security including implementing global environmental agreements and protocols. Protecting remaining wild areas in this country. Complete reduction of corporate rights as individuals. Enhancing and enabling new green industries across this country. Get of carbon based energy. Work to reduce overwork and stressors within the working population with better employee rights and protections.  More support for funding post secondary education. Abolish the senate as per election promises and get on to a new working form of democratic reform including proportional representation. Support a parent (can be mothers or fathers) who elects to be home makers while children are in elementary school.
keep Canada Canadian.  Don't give in to other cultures to change Canada.  When people come to our country, they adopt our ways if they wish to benefit as a Canadian.  Offer assistance to our Canadian born people first, IE. don't give free money, cars, housing, education to immigrants or defectors.  Give this money to Canadians first.  We need to take care of our own Country first.  Keep Canada a safe place to live without fear other races or nationalities take over and change for the bad or control over others. IE. DO NOT ALLOW Sharia law to enter Canada. Do not allow the Syrian's to rape our children and women. Every person must be accountable and justice must be present Keep Canada Canadian.    Get rid of GMO companies like Monsanto and keep people, seeds, soil and waters safe from harmful chemicals such as Round up in all seeds, fertilizers, water etc.  Do not go for TPP
Encourage Canadian and Western culture in new-comers.  Removing any sign of religion from politics.  Teaching young women and girls that they are free to choose their religion, clothes, sexual orientation, etc., and that their parents, brothers, uncles, etc., are not allowed to force them to do anything they do not want to do.  It is very important that all these women that are arriving learn that they are now free, and men should understand and respect that.  I believe this is one topic that the Government should focus on, in order to avoid situations such as that recent one that occurred in Montreal (a 15 y.o. girl didn't want to use the hijab, so she would take it off once she left her house.  Her father noticed it and he beat her up.  He is now in jail.)  Men from all these cultures are used to believe that women are just property, and this CANNOT occur here in Canada.
Yes, you missed the point, apparently. Most of the strategic outcomes listed have very little to do with open government, and likely wouldn't ever impact, or be impacted by, open government policy or practice. Those strategic outcomes are, in fact, legal or institutional obligations of government. Canadians expect their government to fulfill these obligations regardless of its ideological leanings or commitments to openness. So, there is no need to cast such a broad net in an open government plan. Unless that plan calls for opening up questions of policy to dialogue with Canadians in each of these areas their inclusion is rather meaningless. Focus on the basics: transparency & accountability, efficiency, and democratic legitimacy. Each of these is both a means and an end where open government is concerned, and should be both a factor in and goal of any strategic plan. 
I have Lyme disease diagnosed in Canada and initially treated in Canada. If my treatment was adequate, I would not be writing this. My lack of inadequate treatment is absolutely in the hands of your government. My health is a public health concern that has been publicly underestimated. That's not a good thing. I was a Liberal, moderate, life affirming citizen until now. It is clear that your public health department has been corrupted bt US rhetoric. In Canada we listen to the voice of the patient, we do not cling to weak evidence and our policies MUST NOT be rooted in the almighty dollar as they clearly are in the US. Any policy maker or advisor that does not acknowledge this connection should be fired. Now.  I really want to support a Liberal government, but, despite the insanity going on in the US, I am feeling lost and disappointed. 
The Canadian Government gives me the impression that border and immigration security are not important.  The Liberals giving the world the impression that Anybody can come here is wrong.  I do not want Islamic Terrorism and their ideology coming into Canada.  The Liberals give the impression that these matters are not important or if raised by persons like me, we are then cast as racist or bigoted.  Further, our Senators or MPs who have ideology that is Conservative or if they qluestion the Indigenous Spending or Transparency of Indigenous Leadership: the Liberals have given carte blanche to Indigenous Leadership and anybody that questions their motives or anything are called racist and inhumane.  This is wrong because Indigenous Government and Leadership is rife with fraud and poor management, yet we are not allowed to say anything!  
Somethings I list to see is the government start saying NO to handing out monies for wrongdoings. I am sorry our ancestor's wrong people but the payouts have to stop, they need to realize enough is enough and we can't afford to continue to pay things that happens 50 - 100 years ago. Canada needs to start putting Canadians first and take care of our Vets and the homeless. We need to stop letting everyone in and start taking care of our people now. We have so many kids that don't get meals or education while you are letting so many people in and we can't even take care of what we have now.  I know we are known for a caring country however, we need to look after people we have now. So many homeless, people in BC can't afford to buy a house, even to rent a place. The housing in BC needs to be affordable for everyone, not just the rich. 
1. Safety from the growing threat of Islamic Terrorism,   2. Promotion of regional resources that support national initiatives (ie. Ontario auto sector - important to Canada's economic engine, therefore received massive help during downturn, Canada's energy sector - biggest driver of GDP but is getting almost no help from the PMO),   3. De-politicizing of the RCMP - this once proud organization has fallen into tatters due to a lack of staffing resources - primarily because of the ludicrous politically correct environment it now basks in, which in turn creates an untenable recruiting atmosphere.  4. Staff and equip our military properly - our soldiers, airman, and sailors venture out into harms way daily without proper staffing or, for the most part, modern equipment to fulfill their missions.  This is a source of national shame.
1. Stabilizing basic economy of Canada, and to a lesser degree North America should be number one priority. Everything else is meaningless until this is accomplished. Government does far too little far to late in all areas. The demise of the few should never decide the fate of the rest of they country. Government must sacrificed the few so the rest of us who are responsible can have a stress free working life and know for sure what we have worked for decades is secure. That our country is secure.    2. In the future, if government cannot 'fix' the economic state of the country in an appropriate amount of time, consider banning all forms of credit once below a certain economic threshold, with the exception of fixed bank negotiated loans (no variable rates, no credit cards). Make it legislation, make it permanent.
1) Transparency about lengthy government services. WHY does a citizenship or immigration sponsorship application take years, when any relevant database query takes microseconds? WHY does it take 30 days to process an immigration freedom of information request, when it takes microseconds to access that information in the database? I would like a TRANSPARENT PROCESS where we can PEEK BEHIND THE CURTAINS of these outdated processes that are too slow by several orders of magnitude, to finally understand WHY they take so long and how they can be improved.  2) Transparency in government spending: In the digital age, this means being able to drill down to each INDIVIDUAL TRANSACTION in government spending (except for classified items of course). Open up your digital accounting books, instead of just summary reports.
An assembly of the masses! Preferably one which would eventually replace the party and election system forever. That is more streamlined referendums on just about every major decision that is made on the federal level. I think that Canadians are more intelligent as a whole than their representatives can ever be. Its the equivalent of one computer versus a network. Its time to aim for a direct democracy model. Such a system would include reducing the lobbying potential of any special interest group and business while still having their concerns expressed and listened to and debated before a vote.  Any alternative democratic model would have to understand the principles of emergence and include the right variables to make it work. If you want to know more about this vision feel free to contact me.
I need to emphasize that there needs to be a clear understanding of the role of police in our society so that outrageous violations of people's rights of protest occur to a lessor degree than for example at G20 summits. It is understood that there are violent troublemakers however it is also apparent that officers from out of town are brought in and are given an opportunity to violent without wearing a badge and accepting responsibility for their actions. This process of allowing protest and minimizing the damage done by troublemakers has to be more transparent instead of allowing decisions and reviews to be so hidden. Policing needs to grow and evolve. If we continue to allow them to hide behind bureaucratic process when mistakes are made, they won't evolve the way that they need to.
Maintaining our democratic freedoms and the rule of law: https://freedomhouse.org/report/freedom-world/freedom-world-2017;  Environmental and Economic Health - death by terrorism is not the leading cause of death in either Canada or the world - we need to spend more time and energy sharing the resources so everyone benefits.  Public Service needs to be honoured; and those in public service who bring it dishonour need to be fired...forever.  Once the public trust is violated, these people need to find another way to make a living - they should be out of government for good - no second chances. There is no room for half-truths; lies of omission; hands in cookie jars; conflicts of interest - Then, the political class will once again attract youngsters with integrity, vision, and heart.  
Our open border allowing economic migrants not refugees into our country that are not vetted, automatically collecting social assistance, given heated tents and being allowed to travel to Toronto freely, meaning who are they, where are they, how this impacts the taxpayer in increased taxes and safety and dismisses the real immigration process, close these border crossings. Government negative attitude toward using fossil our fossil fuel industry making it available to the world, so that our  country and its citizens could have a thriving economy, your plan to use your  M103 research study to implement and pass into an unfair law that gives one religion, Islam, special privilege over all others and removing free speech about Islam. trudeaus questionable cash for access scheme.
Clean the government of corrupt managers that are protected because they are able to spin stories to protect them and they always destroy one or more employee by mistreating them and lying to them and bullying them.  Get rid of the attitude that Management does not need to answer to anyone but themselves. Have employees evaluate managers (present and past) and look at the responses and if there are one or two that  are not favourable towards the manager then take that as a red flag to indicate that there is a problem and it is most likely that the manager is bullying, discriminating against the employee then take corrective actions with the manager.  If a manager is fair to all of their employees then there should not be any response that is glaring different then the rest. 
the government is going after the little guy in private companies not the huge public companies how can you not see that is wrong? Family business are in peril now due to the changes.  ALSO, for the love of god legalize marijuana , have you not considered the amount of money and resourced that are WASTED over this substance? (the time of police officers arresting and facilitating the offenders in the system, the cost of keeping these people in jail) legalize it and regulate it the same a liquor. And this is not coming from a low-life weed selling individual it is coming from an educated one. The excess revenues from HST/GST on the sales of weed would be astronomical (see Colorado) and could possibly elevate the heavy rates on personal income taxes federally and provincially.
1. Much of the money spent by gov't is in the forms of grants and contributions. There is not enough public information to determine if the money spent provided good value or if results were even achieved. Gov't institutions seem to have "spending" as the objective and not results, so "dumping" money through grants or contributions appears to be a way to circumvent being "accountable" for results.    2. Some audit reports from the OAG, departments, etc. are available on-line, but there is no information on whether the deficiencies or recommendations were successfully addressed. In other words, there is no follow-up. Progress reports should be made available afterwards; otherwise, it appears nothing was actually done (and probably wasn't done if no one ever follows-up).  
1.  I would like to see changes to length of service for elected personnel.  It is time "lifers" be a thing of the past for elected officials.  Eventually, they all find themselves in the position of "owing" their position to a lobbying sector that financially supports their campaigns.  Further, they exhibit self-indulgent and entitled characteristics.  2.  I would like to see repercussions for elected officials who are caught in outright lies and then use excuses, such as lack of information as the source of the lie.  Isn't their job to be informed about issues they discuss from the chair of their position?  Possibly it is time we insisted on a basic set of requirements (knowledge) of the elected positions.  Everyone else in this country must qualify for their jobs!
I would like to know more about some of the commitments that the prime minister has made to marginalized Canadians. For instance, the millennial generation has been suffering from work-related issues for many years - underemployment, unemployment, lack of workplace training - and is particularly vulnerable in the midst of a faltering economy. It would be nice to have official government data on the current issues facing this generation and how the government intends to assist this generation. The millennial generation is the future of this country, but it cannot contribute fully if innumerable, seemingly insurmountable barriers are in place for so many. There needs to be more publicly available statistics on this topic so that the government can be more accountable.
I believe that faith in government begins with fait in the democratic process. While democratic reform seems to mean many things to many people, we deserve a better solution than first past the post in ridings.  Even if it meant that elections were held in two possible phases,  ensuring that an individual has a clear mandate from the riding is key.  Perhaps we could mandate that a candidate has more than 50% of votes cast in order to be elected. If no candidate has 50% on a first ballot, the 2 candidates with the highest number of votes run off to elect one of the top 2).  We could offset the additional cost by giving governments elected in this way a longer mandate (perhaps 6 years).     An elected senate at mid term would a way to put checks in place.     
Canada pension plan..I believe that if you're a widower and your spouse works hard and pass away and would like you continue live a good life and life instead gotten worse and you're not making  any money to support your self..in debt with payday loans..you should be able to get survival benefits even if you are not 65..Its called survivor for a reason..especially with you have a disability that is life treating however under the cpp disability act..you have to be physically unable to work..but have to apply for ODSP because you can't afford medications...shouldn't you be spending what you need right now instead of waiting till your 65..especially when you won't live to be 65 because without medication your immune system will collapse resulting in death.
In Ottawa the most important thing we do is hire Bilingual. Not the best person for the job. We will take the fourth person because they can speak both official languages rather then the person best suited for the job. Stop insisting people be Bilingual to work for the government of Canada Very important. Make this better. I agree we need to keep bilingual position, but not all of them. I am luck I got my position seven years ago and I am grandfathered in. I need new people and not all bilingual people are a good fit. The one that was the best was English but we couldn't hire him and there were no good bilingual team players left. we had to take number 13, because he can speak both official languages. Not because he can do the work we do. Sad isn't it.
The government does not seem to be transparent or accountable at all. The money spent on Canada 150 went well over reasonable, like the $5.5 million skating rink on Parliament Hill. I would like to see real accountability, without spending more than the budget, or to set realistic numbers for spending.    I would like to see more investment in education, especially for elementary school, which is the base of our future. Good education starting in the bases (which would include education in healthy eating, clean environment and bilingualism for ALL Canadians) is the only way to a bright future. Asian countries achieved huge development in just a couple of decades of massive investments in their early education system, with highly paid teachers.
- communication and understandings between all departments and branches to better the way we do business.   - Management should not take on responsibilities of anyone's pay through the pay system.  They have no knowledge of these things.  Let Finance and HR/Compensation take care of that as they always did. This is not the way to be more accountable. That is the wrong approach.  They should be accountable within their unit on how they spend, not how to figure out how someone has to get paid.  They have enough on their plate.  - Mental illness, this is a big concern and should be at the forefront.  Why does it happened?  We are in a fast paste society, people (children, adults), they are only humans not machines, that is what is forgotten.   
1. I have been researching about funding and resources to help support people with disabilities. I found it difficult to talk to anyone. Guidelines are not available online. Other resources are not available as well and it seems like it is a big secret and I have to have connections or know somebody to be able to get the information I want.    2. To be able to speak to someone in charge or email and get a prompt response and not wait for weeks or months. Example CRA. You cannot even speak to anyone and the only time they correspond is when they need something. There is no office to go to so I could communicate what I need.    3. Availability of information. Complete information must be accessible to the public and not just for the few.  
Standards targeting elected officials that will;  1. Direct all MPs to focus on policy driven debate and restrict personal attack in the public forum  2. Set limits to what MPs can say to each other in the House with immunity from legal action  3. Encourage direct and intelligible answers in the House that show respect to the Canadian public and advance understanding of issues and the concerns surrounding them    If the House can develop a code of conduct that encourages clear, truthful and evidence driven debate among elected officials it will form the basis for increased credibility and trust in government. Elected officials not only must be honest and clear in the exercise of their duties but they must also be perceived as doing so.
THE BIGGEST ISSUE IS THE EXTREMELY HIGH RATES OF PERSONAL INCOME TAX,WHICH IS THE BIGGEST SINGLE BILL ANY WORKER HAS.WE SEEM TO HAVE A ROBIN HOOD STYLE OF GOVERNMENT,WHICH ROBS THE (RICH) AND GIVES TO THE POOR!  IF EVERYBODY PAID THE SAME RATIO OF 10% OR SOME VALUE THAT AN INDIVIDUAL CAN AFFORD,IT WOULD STIMULATE THE WHOLE WAY OF CANADIAN LIFE.THIS INCLUDES THE HIGH INCOME BRACKETS AS WELL,BECAUSE WHEN AN INDIVIDUAL IS PAYING 50% OF HIS INCOME IN TAX ...THAT IS APPROACHING SLAVE LABOUR AND IT MEANS THAT 1/2 THIS PERSON'S WORKING LIFE IS FOR SOMEONE ELSE.WHEN SPENDING MONEY, MORE TAXES ARE INVOLVED AND A 13% SALES TAX IS REALLY A 26% TAX AS ALREADY WE ONLY HAVE 50 CENTS OF THE DOLLAR THAT WE EARNED IN THE FIRST PLACE.
It is of major concern that there is no accountability of gov't programs such as immigration when trying to do this type of papers.  When there is a technical problem with the website, there is no human being to help rectify the situation.  For example, I have been trying for two weeks to pay a Citizenship processing fee with no luck and when I try to make a complaint or to just find out  why, I just get a form letter to fill out and even when I do what they say, they still just send me another form letter and do nothing to rectify the situation.  I called the Oh Canada number and just talked to a very rude person who did nothing to help.  It is a ridiculously useless system that does not work to anyone's advantage.
Financial security and finding a good career is my largest concern. I graduated from university roughly 7 years ago and I am still struggling to find decent employment. Most of the jobs I've come across are relatively low paying, offer no pension or benefits, are seasonal or part time, and ultimately are not very interesting or engaging. I've found Service Canada's employment councillors to be somewhat vague. It'd be helpful for employment offices and employment websites to research which job sectors are in demand or will be in demand, and to try to steer job seekers in that direction, and towards career positions as oppose to menial jobs that don't provide a livable income or allow for a healthy lifestyle.
stop using environmentalist to destroy economic growth projects such as clean energy and LNG. We are sick of reduced Vancouver wages and bullshit overtime rates. Putting more tax strain on small business will kill our country and increase crime 100%   The life of a contractor starting out is a rollercoaster sometimes; we dont see payments for months. The reduced corporate tax allows us to feed our families and pay mortgages and rent. Increasing tax is just going to make things harder because we will start charging more for the same services to survive. owning shares in a corporation stops us from getting EI when customers dont pay and contracts are far apart. Liberal gov is doing a piss poor job. 
We need more respect accountability in the daily procedures in the House Of Commons.   Specifically, the House Speaker should be given more authority to require government representatives - cabinet MPs and back-benchers - to properly ANSWER questions posed by the opposition, as opposed to deflecting the questions with non-answers. In other words, the Speaker should be able to judge whether a response from the ruling party actually addresses the question(s) posed. This would greatly aid in understanding the activities of the ruling party, and thereby increase accountability and transparency. This would also tend to reduce the amount of childish heckling that characterizes QP and other debates.
(1) The government should only place ads & snippets that inform the people, not the sickening propaganda hype that tries to lull us with lies or strike fear into us. For example: to avoid road rage, allow an impatient driver to pass without getting caught up in their drama...if they are reckless report them (2) The government needs to remember the fact that the people make the country...not government...and they work for us, not the other way around. (3) The government needs to stop with the poverty mindset...cutbacks are a clear sign they don't know what they are doing. They need to approach from a state of abundance, such as the universe is...and treat us like we are rich, because we are.
I find this survey stale in its approach and presentation.  Open Government initiatives should actually model open government - visually simple & appealing, highly customized to my needs (eg. is there a record of my input & will it be used in other areas of government business where it applies) and responsive (e.g., will you give me feedback on what happens & whether what I said matters).  Government needs to be more open to the public in practical, real-time ways, not just in sending surveys but really bringing Canadians into the boardrooms, open spaces (in fact creating Open Government makerspaces across Canada) so that we can not just be consulted but actually solve problems together.  
I am tired of seeing government move forward with initiatives without taking public input seriously. Example: legalization of marijuana. Why not allow the public to vote on such controversial issues. Even though the medical industry, psychiatric industry, police industry have taken the time to warn the federal gov't of the potential risks, the gov't seems to have blinders on, because they are so focussed on getting tax revenues from the legalization. Then, when I hear on the 6 o'clock news that the gov't is going to spend $36 million of taxpayers' money on a "public education" plan concerning legalizing pot, it makes my blood boil! That $36 million could be put to much better use!!!
The implied definition of "proactive disclosure" used earlier in the questionnaire is limited and misleading. Proactive disclosure is not limited to disclosure on salaries and expenditures - these are simply the most common items that can be proactively disclosed. Proactive disclosure at its best is anticipating where freedom of information requests may come (based on where they have been made in the past) and making those items available proactively. A true proactive disclosure policy would have TBS identify common items most often requested by citizens through FOIs and identify opportunities for systematizing proactive disclosure of non-sensitive items that are commonly requested.
Accountability - if govt officials/politicians are proven to be irresponsible with taxpayer $, or dishonest etc, they should face consequences such as a warning and then dismissal. Unions protect incompetent govt employees much too often. There also should be measurement so that a government project that was supposed to cost a certain amount is evaluated on a regular basis to ensure it is on track and if it goes over budget, once again consequences should occur for its managers. No accountability means no one in govt really cares about meeting goals or using scarce tax dollars effectively. Also government compensation including benefits should be in line with private sector norms. 
1. When asked a question, have the Prime Minister actually answer the question instead of skirting the issue with a sentence or two that sounds like a defendant who learned to repeat what a lawyer told him to say.  2. When asked a question, have the Prime Minister actually provide a tangible solution with specifics instead of "we're working towards blah blah blah" - seems sketchy when details are not provided.  3.  After answering a question in the legislature and replacing the ear piece, have the Prime Minister seriously look at what he looks like doing so - appears conceited and "above thou" attitude - like what he said was better than the question or the person who asked
I felt there was no option to indicate the following are priorities... reducing poverty and helping First Nations citizens of Canada. They are Canadians too and more should be done to provide equality to them and equal access/entitlement to services and resources. I feel there is money and resources being put towards initiatives to immigrate and welcome new Canadians, then employ them AND veterans but these are not provided or encouraged for First Nations and Aboriginal people.  Also, limiting to 3 options per section was frustrating. I felt this was another way of not letting us Canadians have input (or have limited input) into establishing priorities and decision making.
Every Canadian treated the same and Canadian laws have to apply to everyone equally.....every Canadian.  To have one educational system....no longer have education systems according to religion.  Transparency with the financial payments to Indigenous people. We hear about all the money that is paid out to Indigenous people and we also hear about the poverty and unliveable conditions that they endure. Why? We also see many Indigenous people living on the streets...why? Where is their money? We have been told that women are not allowed birth control by the elders so that the bands can get more money...true? We need transparency so that people can understand things better.  
You may gather from my comments that I am NOT a fan of transparency being increased willy-nilly.  Since 9/11, more employees have Level 2 Secret clearance swearing oaths to protect information of different types.  Increasing transparency is sort of ok in my opinion, but there needs to be more common sense applied.  Currently ATIP requests come with deadlines and it seems to me that a private citizen can ask for many large documents in a request, these require a big diversion of resources to deal with and I think there needs to be a clear headed reconciliation of the needs for efficiency and protection of information versus this attempt to give all Canadians more access.
Declining wages  Declining employment numbers  Rising housing costs (gamified system)  Declining health care  Poor educational outcome  Modernization  Political programs that are both anti science and fact  Lack of meritocracy  Lack of agility  Increasing taxes  Lack of coherent strategy  Loss of global competitiveness   Decline in innovation outside of empty government programs  Rising salaries of all bureaucrats (more than double private sector wages)  Lack of open competitive bidding in government procurement  Lack of agility of services  Lack of public consultation (meaningful and diverse of thought with full costs benefit analysis)  Poor treatment of military     
1. Using empirical evidence to make adjustments to intended strategies based on what emerges during execution  2. Engaging across a broad spectrum of society and not just the techie community - artists, writers, etc. can cause us to look at issues differently  3. Stop talking about the tech and talk more about the goals/outcomes. For example, starting with why the GC is in the business of grants and contributions is very different than saying we need to modernize the grants and contribution system (i.e. the software). The former takes us back to the intent of G's and C's which can lead to a very different approach and set of more meaningful outcomes than the latter.
I also think the government needs to think about equality and inclusiveness for everyone, not just minorities.  Currently, caucasian males are being denied positions in law enforcement due to being white and a male even though they are the most qualified for the job.  This is due to government policies put in place that the police force must mirror the make up of the community.  How is that the fair treatment of all people in Canada? This is racism, period and a government policy allows it to happen.   I believe in equality of all but also that the most qualified individuals should be given the opportunity.  I think these government policies need to be re-examined. 
Government must spend money where it will be effective and rely on experts who understand the problem. What get's measured gets done. If it wasn't created by nature, it was created by an Engineer but Engineers are not often consulted by Governments. Engineers build wealth but if they are not set up for success can be the destroyers of Capital because ultimately we have a professional obligation to keep the public safe. Consult with Engineers before starting a project. I think of the Pheonix Pay system and wonder if Professional Engineers were involved? Those licensed to protect the public interest or was it just Software Programmers? Where was the accountability? 
I wish to see more protectiveness of Canadian resources eg: Oil sands, water, Lumber, and Minerals as well as Canadian businesses. I believe to much of our wealth of this country is too easy sold off to other countries with them benefiting. Shouldnt we as Canadians be the beneficiarys of our Countrys resources ? We need to keep Canadian companys in Canadian ownership to protect Canadian Jobs. As well as creating more Canadian jobs in the process. Why is our oil refined in the USA ? Why cant we refine our own oil here ? By building our own refineries thus creating more jobs for Canadians ?   Why are we selling of Canada piece by piece to foreign countries ? 
the government needs to start working for the majority of canadian, we need to look after our seniors raise there monthly income, improve their health benefits a lot of who are struggling, we need to protect them with better policies when they go into private government own facilities... we need to look after small business and look after our homeless in canada.a lot of people have to rent with the new mortgage rules we need to protect how nuch rental places can charge, a lot of the places are charges a lot more then a mortgage would cost these people renting lets intervene and help people get mortgages instead of making the rich richer or making people homeless
Above all Government should be working for all Canadians in an open and transparent way.  Corporations and the 1% wealthy Canadians should not control the outcome.   Everyone should be paying taxes and it should not be legal to send your money off shore to avoid tax.   Imagine the amount of money the Canadian government is losing and that could be used for the country.   If they are making 60 million a year why should they care that they paid 20 million in tax.  It is unfair to expect the middle class and upper middle class Canadians to pay for the 1%.   That needs to stop you need to invoke fair tax rules that makes everyone pay taxes. Not loopholes.  
My wife and I believe it is very difficult to find good paying, fair, and secure jobs in Canada. We both have relocated across the country several times for work and have often been disappointed by our employers. We are both highly skilled professionals with post secondary education yet never seem to be able to have jobs that provide us with the ability to become home owners and parents. We believe that the government of Canada has not done a good job of protecting Canadian jobs and ensuring that we all can have the basics of living. As a result of this we see that the middle class is diminishing and there seems to only be the  wealthy and the poor.
-The Canadian Government should be clear and stick to the values heritage of the fathers of the constitution, the right to express opinion and to freedom, while making all efforts to secure Canadians by putting the right measures in place, fairness should not be an excuse of being naive.   - The health of Canadians is under pressure, cutting medical spend and making it harder for physicians to accept new patients has made our life very difficult. A Canadian patient suffering from a painful illness or disease may wait a year before he finds a specialist. This very inhuman and totally respectful and violates all the values that Canada stands for.   
Take care of all Veterans and their families needs, especially honouring their promises made ( ex: Veterans at Ste. Anne's Hospital, which the Goverment failed to honour the promises made to them  when they unloaded the Veteran's Hospital to Quebec)  Spending our taxpayers money to help the Canadians that are in need, especially the elderly and the children as well as the people who are living on the streets instead of sending money to other countries, take care of our own and then what is left over help the others. CANADIANS should come FIRST!  That is where I want my taxes to go to- TO HELP OUR  OWN- OTHERS IF THERE IS ANY LEFT OVER!!!!     
Government extracts money from Canadians, and that amount continues to increase without regard to Canadians ability to pay, and at some point desire to pay.  why work hard to be successful, to take risks, to improve the welfare of our communities and the people that live in them by giving over half of our earning to governments.  Those governments do not seem to husband the money they do receive, and  target the spending in a way that also benefits Canadians.  I see too much irrelevant spending, very little accountability.  Is very easy to spend somebody else's money, rather than your own.  Entitlement at political level often discovered.
I believe this is a pointless exercise designed to make Canadians feel the government is listening to them but at the end of the day the government will tell us that we :just don't understand the complexities" of whatever situation/program is being discussed.    Second, I believe MP's should be willing to resign if they do not live up to a promise made to the electorate before the election.      Serious problem with ethics in the current government.  If a minister has a conflict, he/she should be allowed to address it and be questioned on it by the media - not the PM answering all the questions.  In no way is this open and transparent. 
Canada should pay more attention to the UN International Human Rights Treaties obligations and sign the Optional Protocol on the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Optional Protocol to the Covenant on Economic Social and Cultural Rights. Ensure these legal rights are implemented at the Local and Provincial Government levels by harmonizing the laws with these BINDING Treaties. Canada needs to Eliminate Violence Against Women immediately and restore safety and security in our communities by a more robust legal system which makes offenders financially accountable to victims of violence against women.
Charity starts at home. Before you spend another dime making someone feel better in another country. Make sure EVERYONES perfectly happy HERE first.     I was born here my grandfather fought for this country in ww2 and Ive struggled to keep a roof over my head.     I was even pushed off a housing list because the shelter returned my mail to sender.     But other people are being ushered into homes.?!?  Im on EI now, behind on rent again, at risk of losing my home AGAIN. Until I, and many others like me, are a stable home to provide for my son, how dare you give away my tax dollars and others before our needs are meet. 
Would have liked to have been able to pick a few more of your top sixteen, on previous question.  In general, federal government needs to sponsor EDUCATION (yes, I realize it's within provinces' jurisdiction) , HEALTH and WELFARE as the three main areas, after security/safety, of course, to enable Canadians to continue to innovate and prosper and lead the world to a higher quality of life for all.  Everything else (e.g. infrastructure programs, etc.) is "details", as they say, though of course also important.  Finally, federal government must lead us on the single most important issue facing mankind: CLIMATE CHANGE.
The allocation of budget to federal employees in all departments and agencies. Although the call centre I work for needs my input to meet their operational needs, there is a lack of budget because someone misallocated or misused the budget. Therefore, I lost my job due to a deficit Canada Revenue Agency was facing. It is important for me to pass down this message. The bad work of one person can directly influence another person's financial stability and whole life. It also causes permanency issues for me because my work experience will not be taken into account because of that 30 day rule. I feel like it is unfair.
Limiting me to 3 responses kind of sucks. The last list had a great deal of things that are priorities to myself. Except all that BS about global selling out to China and the US. I really can't understand how you believe that selling our country to another (one that does not believe in Human Rights at that), is somehow good for Canadians. To top that off it looks like you are going to bend over for the fascists to the south. Unreal. We really need some more intestinal fortitude in government. Finally get a diverse government, but now you're all a bunch of eunuchs, who are afraid of a big bad orangutan. Pussies.   
Clean up harassment, discrimination, corruption (and nepotism) by senior executives in the Public Service and Federal Institutions.    Review bonous performance pay for senior executives as it puts them in a potential or real conflict of interest situation in taking decisions, not necessarily in the public interest, to simply meet on paper, their own performance objectives to qualify for bonus pay.    To implement a professionally competant representative and inclusive and diverse work force especially at senior decision making levels in the NCR and a closer examination of Federal institutions in the provinces.
I think the Government should look to try and crack down on oligarchies. (I.E Telecommunication companys holding a majority in the market place)     Also there should be an effort to try and put extra protections on companies that mine resources that are not necessarily taxed as traditional resources. (I.E Nestle paying next to near nothing pumping out thousands of litres of Water.) If we don't want to tax "water" as a resource then why not tax extra for the usage ofplastic bottles. Our government can then use that extra money to improve other areas where funding is either lacking or not available enitrely.   
My main concern is a better level of economic equality; having wealthy Canadians receiving $s from any form of government subsidies or tax breaks while seniors, persons with disabilities, single parents, and low income earners live at or below the poverty level is not socially responsible nor is it economical beneficial in the long term. As the population ages and our upcoming younger generations struggle to make ends meet, many Canadians are being impacted negatively. Increases in serious mental, emotional, and physical health will increasingly negatively impact Canadians ability to contribute to society. 
Top Priorities should be: 1. Green Sustainability.   Making people accountable for their actions when it comes to damaging the environment (from the big company selling horrible, plastic based products, to the little guy littering on the street)  2.Health and Safety.   Making people accountable for their actions when it comes to damaging our bodies (from selling unhealthy products and substances (tobacco for ex), to driving recklessly and putting our lives as risk).     Make knowledge about how to be a good citizen more available: How to report distracted drivers for ex.  Teach our local bylaws in school!   
Federal and Provincial partnership on major energy projects to grow the economy. Once the projects are started it should continue even when the government of the day changes out. It has cost tax payers immensely when projects or even procurement of equipment for government departments ie CAF, ships and aircrafts are cancelled. My concern is the waste of tax payers money, my money. I feel once a project is approval the government is to continue ahead and not be able to cancel just because of party ideology.  Corporate investors are losing confidents in the Canadian government due to instability our economy.
Yes the need to change our electoral system. Your government has reneged on the promise you made to make our electoral system truly representative and fairly represent the different parts of the country. This was an opportunity to strengthen our democracy and invite more participation in elections since people would have been encouraged to know their votes actually counted. It felt like the government and in particular Prime Minister were listening to the old guard of the Liberal party  intent on keeping majority power.  This government has missed the opportunity to create a truly modern democracy. 
1. More clearly explain in what ways citizens can interact with the government at each stage in the legislative process.  2. More accountability on why government accepted or rejected opinions of experts or testimonies of other individuals at hearings related to legislation.  3. Openness on trade deal negotiations with more opportunity from Canadians that are not in the focal industries to provide feedback.  3. "360 degree" assessments of federal departments and their work - ask their partners, such as other levels of government, to comment on where, or if, the federal departments are value added
Honestly, I am at a loss to understand how significant portions of "open government" activities to date, which should relate to transparency and accountability (most of the questions asked so far), jumped way past the lowest hanging fruit (ex. easily searchable info on who gets money from government via procurement and grants and contributions), and went after complicated issues like open government science, a topic that few (including those leading the charge) seem to understand and/or are unable to explain from a position of "what's in it for Canada" and how will we maximize the benefits.   
Government accountability needs to include MP's, their assistants, party members.  We have seen far too many of this current governments "do as i say not as i do" with respect to ministers not keeping family business in blind trusts (Morneau and Raybould Wilson); lying/omitting place of foreign birth on passports (Monsef);using party funds to help finance family members campaigns (Hehr).  Start there and then, only then will i begin to believe in government transparency, accountability and honesty. Because right now, i have none and believe all Government employees to be crooks and thieves.  
In my opinion the most important government priority should be the elimination of debt.  The government should not be allowed to create deficits, a sound economic environment will spawn growth and a positive benefit to all Canadians.  The reckless fiscal management of the present Federal government will shackle present and future generations with unacceptably high debt.  The government spending has to be curtailed, this government has the appearance of an alcoholic looking anywhere for that next drink.  This is what the government's predatory tax policies look like to the working Canadian.  
Arguably, all the items listed are priorities for open government. First and foremost, however, are the items that directly address Canada and Canadians versus others worldwide...that is not to say we should not be good  and open  global citizens, but we can only do so much and we need to focus appropriately.  Relatedly, though our relationship with the United States is of prime importance on numerous fronts, we must strengthen relations with other 'founders' and kindred countries/polities  viz., the United Kingdom, France, Ireland, (the remainder of) the EU, Australia, and New Zealand.
I would like to see more accountability for the failure to keep our children in Government care save and secure.  Shame, shame, shame on everyone who lets these kids fall through the cracks.    I would also like to see known criminals, gang members, repeat offenders, persons known to police taken off the streets.  Please back up our Police Forces and ensure these low lifes are put in prison.    And seriously!!!!! take the phones away from anyone caught texting while driving and don't give them back... ever!!! I can't stress enough how badly you are failing at this serious driving hazard. 
-Most people don't really understand the complexity of issues facing government. Being more transparent should drive greater public education.    -Too much focus in government is put on communicating with Canadians through traditional means (i.e. media or stakeholder groups). Most media articles and stakeholder views are biased/flawed/poorly-researched. I would rather go directly to the info myself and draw my own conclusions about how government is doing.    -Government needs a different risk culture when it comes to public information. The current ATIP regime is a prime example of this.
the fact that the government , IMPORTS oil rather than using the oil that is in the country to benefit the whole country. The government needs the money that is made from oil but does not promote that to benefit the country through exploration of the resource. Instead they follow lobby groups and don't ACTUALLY look at the real environmental costs, shipping and rail transportation of OIL is worse than a pipe line, the fact that the government hides the through and supports a lobby group ideas when this resource could make us more sovereign, increase employment and wealth of the country. 
Job wages and cost of living in Canada and bringing back a middle income family. At the moment it seems it costs $3000 a month or more to live in Canada while most jobs are giving minimum wage or poor wages. Cost of living must equal. THe more Canadians make the more we can spend and improve our economy therefore lower our credit debt ratio and increase cash flow.  The working just to barely get by needs to be eliminated. We need to work to live peacefully and happily in a bracket that allows us to do so without struggling from month to month and yet working 40 hour weeks or longer.
The only thing I want to mention is that due to the increase in technology, e-commerce and internet shopping, many manual labour jobs that help fuel the economy are being wiped out.  Successful immigrant business owners can barely go to a bank or retail store and see a human face to help with business transactions.  The government does very well on Economy and Health & Safety concerns, but does not have as easily a platform to assist small businesses on "essential day to day" business tasks.  You shouldnt have to hire a job agency to due confidential e-commerce for a small business.
We are gifted to live in a bilingual country witch contributes even more to our cultural diversity. Have stated that, I find it extremely disappointing not having a free or inexpensive French program funded by our Federal Government. A program somewhat similar to LINC as an incentive to add to our values as proud Canadians Citizens and also give us the opportunity to apply for those bilingual job posts. I believe there are many of us out there that would love to have this privilege and would make the most of it to enhance our core values, bring us close together as an only nation. 
Always focusing on one or two major cities (Toronto and Vancouver) development and make dense population and high house pricing we can focus on development of many cities same like US. so that the population will spread across many cities and country will grow big. We always depend on US and why not we focus on our own market and try to produce more things in Canada itself and export to Asian and South American markets. This is time to think about developing our own country in to super power. No need to depend on other countries and we have the potential and knowledge to deliver.
I am not at all comfortable with the concept that "only three" of a list of 16 priorities can be chosen.  I would certainly hope that government can accomplish more than just 3 services or priorities at a time. It was nearly impossible for me to select 3 items in the list of 16, and many if not all of them should take top priorities.  They are often interactive in nature, and ignoring one or more means degrading others with inefficient or incomplete responses to those issues.    It was a bit like asking "which would you prefer, water, food or shelter?"  They are all necessities. 
That top officials within government cannot abuse their power and that they do not break the law.  If they have broken the law.....they are gone with no excuses.   ie  using off shore accounts as a tax shelter.  Another concern is accepting campaign funds from companies who you in turn give special favours to.   Stop wasteful government spending like thousand dollar bar tabs on flights overseas......like hundreds of thousands of dollars paid our for security while PMs travel to island vacations.........like millions given to known terrorists and I could go on....you get the point
I believe we need to start focusing again on the Seniors of this country.  Many are struggling and though the government gives money to many groups of new immigrants, indigenous people, Transgender individuals we never see the people who have already given so much to the Canadian economy and identity supported through increasing their income to live a much easier and dignified life in their senior years.  Life keeps getting so much more expensive, and with the meager cost of living raise every years it's a disgrace and a very disrespectful way of honoring our Senior citizens.
1. Clean up the environment, change industrial direction on shipping oil (i.e. Lac Mgantic), Follow Germanys' example with more solar, less oil..  2. Invest in Canadas' Military, we are going to need it in the future with the world is going (Trump).  3. Be very guarded in trading with China.  They have ambitions, and they are way ahead in this goal than most people think.  Just look at their 1200 military islands in the South China Sea they built in a dozen years, with no one to stop them.!!!  Their space weaponry will make Trump and USA look like Girl Scout Majorettes.
Across all activities government engages in let there be less of old views of a ruling class managing and providing for a general population, and let there rather be more of the understanding that we, Planet Earth and all the humans and other living things upon it, are dearly loved by God or whatever you chose to call THAT which created all of this, all that is. Let us be particularly clear in understanding that ALL HUMANS on the planet are equally loved - equally precious - not a single one entitled to any consideration that another be denied - PERIOD - NO EXCEPTIONS.
I just want the Governments to behave with a higher degree of professionalism, honor and respect. To behave as they expect everyone else to behave. To fix the laws so that no guilty party can escape discipline on technicalities. If anyone in a position of authority behaves anything less than professional, respectful etc they should be immediately removed from said position. They should be held by a much higher standard if they are to be taken seriously and to be respected back. The world should not be Reality tv show. Live by example and expect the same in return.
Easy and timely access to population statistics and government studies, with analytical features, for data such as the census, tax filer datafiles (summary, not individual!), labour market data, social surveys, and so on.  Access to employer reports on Employment Equity (and related), as well as access to analyses / summaries.  Access to reports and publicly-owned intellectual property produced by government-funded projects. This would reduce duplication and enhance future projects.  Information on authors / sources of government-funded projects and reports.
I think having a country that is concerned less with social programs and more with innovation, research and development.  That is what creates jobs and new industries and attract qualified people those who have a degree or diploma to stay in our country because there are opportunities.  Too many retail and part time jobs is what is fueling our economy and that will not sustain us in the long term.  I do not believe in social programs, but with tax breaks that allow families to use the money where is best suits them.  Social programs are expensive to operate.
1. It is important to me that the government is spending our money on the items most important to Canadians.  2. With respect to spending, I understand that it is important to make contributions to other countries less fortunate than us or contribute to disaster recovery, however, we should make sure that this spending is not done at the expense of our own needs - like providing help to our veterans, our homeless and our healthcare. Just like families budget for charitable contributions, there should be the same consideration at a federal charitable level.
Free speech.  Laws of criminal activity created equal to all citizens regardless of culture, race and religion.   Health care and welfare to the elderly.  Hire medical experts who choose to live in Canada that come from other countries.  Protect our borders.  Affordable housing and proper care for Native Canadians first. Canadians second and all others last.  Export Canadian oil.  Free dental and eye care for those under 18 and 50 and over.  Regulate and specify agricultural products and all foods that Canadians buy and eat.  A thigh tax on junk food.    
I don't think answering a few questions will ever be able to express how I feel, but I'll give it a shot. I've traveled all over this great Planet of ours and there's always one feeling I get at the end of a vacation, I can't wait to get home. We are very lucky here and although there may be problems here that concern all of us, they are nothing compared to whats going on just about everywhere else in the world. We are truly blessed. The simple fact that you are asking for input here shows what concerns us. Every voice matters. Good luck and safe journeys
- Continue welcoming refugees and new immigrants;  - Truth and Reconciliation with First Nations that respects the treaties agreements and welcomes new Canadians as well;   - Continue with international trade and collaboration... But, if we agree to play a major role in the economies of other countries (e.g. having Canadian mines overseas) conciliate opportunity with serious and ethical responsibility.  - Have a stronger voice for Human Rights and Social Justice around the Globe;  - Affordable Housing and Affordable Higher Education for our youth;     
The transparenty  and justification of bills like M103  by the self  serving interest of ministers wihtout any justification.  this bill was designed to protect one group  while the data from my own city shows three other groups that are targeted by hate  (speech or physical assault or property damage) well ahead of them . yet  these groups have no such bills  to protect them but are told to to use the existing las.  This type of bill actually causes  more damage in promoting loss of free speech  while allowing hate speech based on religious doctrine. 
Previous aspects in the previous question are all equally important to me and was difficult in selecting 3.  However, I strongly believe that people that choose to be accountable, responsible, respectful, honest and compassionate will deliver on any aspect that the government seeks to accomplish.  All we need to do is focus on these characteristics when hiring people and training people to help identify people with self motives.  We need people in the Public Sector that put Canada first and that want to create a positive environment for all involved.
Canada needs to be able to look after the individuals that are already here before the government continues to support those outside the country. Continuing in the current direction puts increased pressure on social systems and healthcare that is not sustainable. Instead of growing the economy by increasing the population, government needs to look at streamlining government. A smaller population requires less government and fewer services, and reduces the carbon footprint on the planet. This government is 'speaking out of both sides of its mouth'.
1. All documents released in access to information should be posted publicly on government website. The source of data and methodology used to collect it should also be posted. The performance ratings of management should also be posted, including evidence to support rating methods (or whatever parts of the evidence can be posted publicly) including turnover of employees, type of staffing processes used, how much spent on consultants & profile of employees in unit - types of jobs, orga strucutr, where in Canada employees are from for each office.
I worry that the construction of this survey is inadequate: the last question in particular required me to choose my 3 most important policy measures from a list of 16, but I feel I can expect the government to address more than 3 issues at a time, such that having to choose between secure workplaces, healthy environment, strong democratic institutions, transparency, health, diversity,  and so on is far from an adequate way to express my wide-ranging policy concerns. Had I been given free rein, I would have selected 7 of the 16 as top priorities.
Changing the education system to reflect our changing society to one that is more innovative, pertinent, success and skills oriented and moving away from the traditional 90% academic. This would better prepare young Canadians entering the work force with applicable skills such as computer skills, budgeting skills, time management, personal protection, public speaking, how to prepare their own taxes etc. While history, mathematics and language remain important, youngsters these days have difficulty in engaging in or relating to such dry material!
ensuring that open government is aligned with other #GCdigital initatives and priorities, e.g. CDS, Canada.ca, etc.    Please note also that some of the yes/no questions in this survey are a bit odd, e.g. "Is transparency an important issue for you?" and "Is government accountability an important issue for you?" - I'm having trouble imagining who would answer "no" to these questions... all I can come up with is unreasonable people who want to weaken democracy and good government?  Not sure you'd get much useful data out of these questions.
The role of the citizen in government has been lost.  I believe that many Canadians don't know how to participate in the governing process, or the importance of being engaged and active in government.  Many of us probably assume that the extent of our responsibility extends no further than voting, and even then many Canadians are voting without being sufficiently informed of the issues and impact.  I would love to see our government focus some energy on promoting active citizens, and even going as far as to educating us on what that means.
I feel, that no matter how hard I work to strive and make a life for myself that I can never seem to really get ahead.  I feel the government is doing its best to keep middle class there for a lifetime slogging it out & paying way too high taxes (I've had to pay in excess $2000 or more each year for the past three years.... I have to borrow the money to pay my taxes!  Ridiculous!  Who can afford to have a "Savings" account these days... not me.  I've held a full time job since leaving high school, I'm not even sure I can afford to retire!
we're way nehind on inclusion especially talking about immigrant with post secondary degree we can do way better.  If we look @ canadian institution we don't hear the support Canada provide to 3rd countries(africa) but on the other hand immigrant from those country feels so integrated here.The disconnection is there  For international commerce:we have also a huge opportunity to fill the gap (where there used to be europian countries we see more south asian implication-Canada can have more presence and impact to driv the business out there
Government responses to Canadians' letters should be posted publicly for other Canadians to see (with the permission of the letter writer). The current system of 'dockets' is slow, repetitive, and opaque. Many times Canadians are writing about the same issue, and responding to multiple letters on the same subject is also a waste of government resources. A central repository of docket responses would allow Canadians to see what has already been asked and responded to. The identity of the author would be hidden to protect their privacy.
Fix the Phoenix disaster. Stop blaming the employees and telling them that they are to blame for not correctly filling in the forms. We need to be able to pick up the telephone, explain the problem and get it fixed by the person on the other side of the telephone and not be speaking to an intake person who has no power to do anything.    This seems to be the problem with most government departments. Nobody has the power to actually fix the problems on the spot. CRA is a also a good example where is take years to get problems solved!
Creating space in the media landscape so a diversity of voices can be heard. The recent decision by the CRTC to allow broadcast distribution undertakings to close the Vancouver and Toronto community television channels was a serious blow to community participation in media. This participation allowed community members to communicate with government and was a way for government to communicate with the public. Online platforms such as FB and YouTube do not function in the same way and are not a replacement. This was a poor decision.
Not be refused service, ordered to cease operations, rendered destitute or threatened by Crown Agents for attempting Global trade in benefit of Mtis Interests.  Not to be Terrorized by Crown Agents for speaking the truth of Canadas Trade History. Not be abused, shamed or ignored when attempting Communication through to Settlement of dispute  Processes. To be treated with the Care, Compassion and Understanding of the Trauma and mistrust that comes from being abused, robbed and lied to by the Defacto Crown Claimant  for 400 years.
I would like to know who citizens can talk to and effect change regarding policy for health services and education. For instance, why do we pay our student debt to banks instead of our province. Why don't patient liaison employees follow patients throughout their stay in hospital. Who decides it is better to feed a child crackers and cheez whiz then a sliced apple for a breakfast program based on the school not having an expensive designated kitchen, and report cards that do not make a teacher accountable for a marking rubric? 
Enough with the stupid tearfull fake sorrys from Ottawa. Put some action behind the words and physically fix the mistakes and aftermath caused from years of disgusting abuse and lies - Indigenous peoples, Veterans and the poor. A country with the amount of wealth and resources that we exploit and ship out yet we have poverty? social classes? tuition? DISGUSTED with this place and the latest leadership. A party promise then exceuted the exact opposite of what they were elected to do (supposedly, based on their engineered lies).
I feel that the Canadian Government is using tax payers money to help every other country, except Canada.  We should be investing our tax dollars in Canada, by creating employment opportunities, helping low income families and the homeless.  Providing for our children's education, and healthcare for Canada should be a priority, however most programs have been cut under the current Canadian Government.  Make Canada and Canadians strong, mentally, physically, and financially, before you help other countries and their citizens.  
Ensuring the right person is in the right job - regardless of language skills. Ensuring that individual with special skills and abilities are sought out and used to the extent of these skills and abilities, that senior management listens to the front-line employees, they are the individuals who know what works and what doesn't work and may have great insight as to how things should be done to create an effective and efficient government that can provide me with timely and accurate services and information when I need them.  
I think is important to improve newcomers integration, by enhancing a system  for adopting the Canadian basic culture with the contribution of their culture if the case. Integration and amalgamation is an important factor in order to generate a more effective power of business/work capability. Many newcomers they live with the "head back-home and the feet in Canada"! A more effective system to help them to make feel Canada as their country would improve the potentiality of efforts empowered in the work/business thread.
Any Canadian affiliated with a known terrorist organization should have their rights as a Canadian suspended. No support for anyone who decides to associate with known terrorist. And please stop giving Canadians tax dollars to known terrorists. The Omar Khadr copout was a huge embarrassment to Canadians and sent the wrong message.  If someone spends time in prison because of suspected terrorist activities then maybe the shouldnt spend time associating with terrorist. Omar Khadr left Canada to join ISIS, end of story.
Departments need to collaborate more.  For instance, if one IT department is providing it's software developers training, they should allow all the other departments to webex in.  If another department creates an API/web service or an application that could help other departments do their jobs, they should share.  We are reinventing the wheel 104 times, especially in IT.  Collaboration should be encouraged and even mandated in some situations.  It's better for Canadians if we spend less and do a better job by sharing.
With Innovation comes risk taking - My hope is that this openess doesn't lead to a risk adverse leadership -  bureaucracies tend to inhibit change and growth through the multiple layers of decision making.   Also,  Keep an eye on how our leaders lead - from DG to DM - and create a supportive, constant focus on developing leaders who deliver results AND still create the kind of workplace where public servants can bring their best to work everyday and return to their families or lives healthy at the end of the day.  
I'm a professional engineer. I'm busy like nobody else, and it drives me nuts.     I need you to take my status, and the status of all licensed professional of an exclusive practice into account. We should be entitled to some prerogatives in exchange to an acceptation to less privacy from the government. I really need more data, and somehow, the government should be working for me to provide that data back to me.    I really need a release to my professional burden. It's not a dream, it is still a nightmare. 
Less a specific item, but more a thought for consideration.  I appreciate this topic and even this survey.  We live in a world where information is so available to us within seconds that the perception is that the gov is WAY behind on this with all its 'closed' doors etc.  Opening up where possible (I, and most Canadians understand that not everything can be made available) will go a long way to just making the gov seem relevant to Canadians.  Thank you for your time and efforts on this very important topic. 
I am counting on my government to make tough choices! I know it's easy to say one cares about the environment and the health of Canadians but making the choices to ensure this happens can be difficult! I am counting on my government to make tough choices that in the long run are investments in a healthy planet and a healthy population! We as a species are smart enough to find better ways to do things! Ways that don't harm the planet or the people who live here! I am counting on my government to lead the way!
Issues of mental health-  know this is a big one. However, our lack of action and direction on this issue is failing Canadians and costing us a crazy amount of money. It is shameful that as a wealthy country like Canada we are failing those who need us most and nothing has changed in my life time; I am 52. Create a separate Government Department it is certainly needed. Also child care, maybe if parents did not have to choose their kids over the roof on their heads - make happy healthy families a priority.  
One of the available responses to the Government Accountability question was not relative to the question. "Privacy and security of personal data", in my opinion, is a separate issue.  It is very important to me.  If your questions were numbered, I could be more specific.  I consider this survey to be of low quality because it failed to accept additional comments for each question, where respondents could point out confusion and flaws in the questions and available responses.  You can do better than this!
It's important that government representatives on committees or working groups determining policies not have conflicts of interest and that their views are not constrained by the influence of organizations with a conflict of interest or who have power over them.  (For example, Infectious Disease specialists or PHAC representatives may be influenced by the IDSA or CDC's points of view regarding treatment, surveillance and testing for Lyme Disease rather than being allowed to present unbiased opinions.) 
1. I want the government to provide easily accessible  and complete databases of official publications and data.  2. I want the government to digitize government publications that are currently unavailable online.  3. I want the government to respond fully to Access for Information Requests and make ATIP requests that have already been filled, easily available to the public.  4. I want the government to eliminate crown copyright, thus making it even easier to share older information and publications. 
Areas where government interventions is needed immediately:  Creating Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) for highly allergic substances used in workplaces and proper regulations - example walnuts used as a sandblasting agent and my brother who died October 2017 from exposure  Cleaner and affordable formula for infants - formulas used in hospital and on the shelves contain Corn Syrup Solids as a primary ingredient, yet healthy alternatives imported from Germany such as Lebenswert is extremely pricey.  
I AM NEW IMMIGRANT UNDER SKILL WORKER PROGRAM, UNFORTUNATELY AFTER TREE YEARS LANDING IN CANADA, I CAN'T FIND MY CAREER PATH, INCOME IS LOW COST LIVING IS HIGH!!!  WHY THE GOVERNMENT OPEN THE DOORS FOR INTERNATIONAL FLIPPER IN REAL STATE!!!  THEY INCREASE COST HOUSING, RENTAL PAYMENT , THEY MAKE GOVERNMENT RICH AND MASS    PEOPLE POOR!!!  DID YOU KNOW REAL UNDER POVERTY LINE????  I CAN'T TRUST !!!!  WE ARE SMASHED UNDER RENT PAYMENT FOR INVESTMENT INTERNATIONAL RICH PEOPLE,THIS IS NOT FAIR....        
Lyme Disease - The Federal Framework which was developed in 2017 is failing Canadians and was developed without transparency or collaboration - as a result, a petition which now has over 52,000 signatures and growing was started. https://www.change.org/p/minister-petitpas-taylor-ticking-lyme-bomb-in-canada-fix-canada-s-lyme-action-plan-now  The government is NOT listening to the needs of Canadians - patients are falling through the cracks, children and adults alike denied treatment - it is a travesty.
To ensure that Canada is leading the way and not following others, with the current economic activities we should be pushing older modes of transport (rail, subway etc) and not spending more on roads, we should also be working to put money into innovation tech, renewable energy where this is just starting to become feasible and still requires investment in it, if we as a whole could lead this segment then maybe Canada would not be dependent so much on our natural resources but our lead in technology 
In my opinion,the Old Age Security payments each month are a total joke.It barely covers my grocery bill and mortgage. My parents and I worked hard all our lives and shaped this country into what it is today and no credit is given to us. At my age of 72,I should be travelling and enjoying my life as there isn't much of it left. Instead,I am still working in order to make ends meet.There is no justice for seniors and feel we should get a raise to at least $1000 per month. That is not asking for much.
The Canadian government needs to recognize that Canadian tax dollars are meant for NECESSITIES.  Tax dollars need to be spent on those things that are available for ALL Canadians, not for the elite.  So, for example, not all Canadians can go to the Olympics when hosted in Canada.  So, Canadian tax dollars should not be spent to promote or attain the Olympics.  There are so many Canadians who cannot afford health care, dental care, food, education.  Why the hell is the government wasting our money???
This survey is very difficult to answer as you do not define many of the terms that you ask questions on.  For example you use the term 'fair' without describing what it means.  There is a general cynicism within the general public that governments use present sounding words (like fair) to disguise some fairly draconian practices.  For transparency I would like you to define how you interpret the lofty sounding words that you toss out in the hopes of ensnaring those who take the words at face value.
Commitment to Canadians first in major disasters rather than other countries. The lack of federal support for the BC wildfires this past summer had led to many people being discouraged with the federal liberals and loss of support for the liberal party overall. Having Canadian fire rescue workers sleep in the open without tents or bedding is unacceptable when the federal government and its counterpart the Canadian Red Cross sent those supplies across the border, while our fire fighters went without
Your focus seems to be on the world while our businesses and residents need our first focus with world economy as an enter rather Tay as a priority.  Our Canadian businesses need to be your business priority. Our residents need to be your people priority. You need to focus on working with our Canadian tech firms and thru them to others rather than trying to build our products and service with your "open applications" strategy.  I do not disagree with open, BUT don't bankrupt our companies, help. 
Currently I believe that there is a "them and us" mentality in our country.  Government versus citizens or citizens versus government, rather than a more healthier environment of cooperation.  Government in a democracy is intended to represent the people, not rule the people, and the people should not feel that government is a parental figure and/or something to fear.  Citizens in a democracy should be able to take an active role in shaping government policies.  Let's focus on working together. 
need to spend more time embracing canada's indigenous history and promoting health and wellbeing of communities in need. Government could do more, it's disappointing not to see this on the list of issues. Also very disappointed with the voting referendum being decided against because I was an advocate for proportional representation. Trudeau made a big deal about it but as soon as he got in he shut it down. Saying Canadians don't need change like that any more is a very Harper-istic thing to do.
Effective and affordable access to legal advice, and guidance for business and family matters prior to any difficulties arising  Affordable access to the courts with effective supports and guidance available at a reasonable cost. The hourly fee of many lawyers is the same as the after-tax money made in a week from a minimum wage job.   Public and separate Schools offering life skills - balance a checkbook, household financial management and understanding of the family and criminal law systems. 
Fair representation of aboriginal rights not only on reserves, but in other rural and metropolitan areas. There is a systematic bias in place that doesn't seek to understand or cater to aboriginal Canadians as is prevalent with other cultures. As a descendant of European immigrants, I feel there is blatant hipocracy in our government's timely response to tensions surrounding the integration of new cultures into the Canadian landscape while still refusing to work hand in hand with aboriginals.
It is increasingly frustrating that some government institutions are leaps and bounds ahead in terms of providing Canadians efficient and effective services and others lag significantly.  Of note, the branch of CRA that is involved in following up on tax returns does not (apparently) accept documents electronically.  They force Canadians to fax and/or mail documents - which creates a much larger privacy risk than email and is simply out of step with the pace of technology in our daily lives.
It would be useful if citizens, and especially government employees, could easily find everyone in government affiliated with a certain project, possessing certain expertise, or involved in a certain program. This would benefit transparency by allowing visibility on the actual human resources committed to projects; and would benefit productivity by permitting employees to quickly identify people who previously worked on similar subject matter or who possess expertise relevant to their work.
My primary concern is that of information asymmetry between the government and its citizenry. My view is that privacy is as good as dead, because the digital exhaust emanating from each person is almost impossible to handle securely and responsibly. Even if regulations make acquiring data under certain situations illegal, this would only encourage a burgeoning black market. Instead, the focus should lay on making government and other large and influential bodies as transparent as possible.
Transparency and accountability are only part of the equation.  My fear about answering yes to the loaded questions on those themes is that there will be much hand-wringing at the upper levels of government that hinders rather than helps the cause of open government.    What's important is that taxpayers have access to data that they are funding the government to collect.  It's not just transparency.  It's not just accountability.  The reason they should have access is because it's theirs.
Some key major spending projects for Canada should be voted on by the people of Canada and not simply the Leading political party of the day. It is Canadian's hard earned dollars that seem to be clawed back more and more every year by all levels of government so ALL Canadian's should have a say on major spending, either it be purchase of Navy ships, Fighter jets OR major infrastructure spending. and these votes should be either part of the General Election or at Mid term of a mandate.
I believe that charity starts in one's own backyard. We have starving children, we have starving first nations, but it seems that we give most of residual funds to outsiders. I'm all for keeping people safe, but the people coming from a first class citizen country, the U.S. and claiming refugee status is quite difficult to digest as a taxpayer. They are not in war torn country. !! Please send these people back. They chose their country, they must live with their laws and regulations.
i love my country canada,we missed to talk about so many important issue the government corruption and spending canadian people money by steeling publice spending money.I hope and i ask the government to open small court to judje those who do corroption and using publice vote and trust,if canada save money from those (bad apple) then canadian will be in a good shape financialy and economicly.there is so many things to talk about, to make canada the best country ever in this EARTH.  ,
hard to decipher and make your way through various policies and procedures/acts/regulations etc. Information that an employee can go to, to determine where they fit and all avenues available to them to apprise government of dysfunctional operations. esp CRA who establishes own legislation and is NOT held accountable to how they treat their employees (especially term or 'temporary" employees who have been employed in the same job without breaks in service and not made indeterminate).
Policy being based on economic reasons rather than focused on safety and security of Canadians.  Lack of oversight of regulations.   i.e. economist running Transport Canada rather than subject matter experts.    Major infrastructure projects being undertaken on critical infrastructure without security being a serious consideration.  For example, the policy on government security not being mandatory to crown corporations (i.e WIndsor Detroit Bridge Authority) puts Canadians at risk
I note that every message from the Government of Canada is prefaced with benevolent and morally correct sentiment; which does seem to wrap the eventual points of communication in layers of, "If you don't agree with the points of this Government then you are a bad person, likely someone that doesn't care about the future of every citizen of the planet and or babies and or puppies and kittens."  Thanks for being objective and basing decisions on some sort of reasoned argument.
The federal government needs to stop being reactionary to Health Care.  Instead it needs to be innovative and proactive in improving the long term health of Canadians.  I would like to see Health Canada actively developing and promoting low cost comprehensive 'healthy eating plans' for Canadians of all ages.  Instead of just the Canada Health Guide, I believe what we need is specific complete menu apps available to all canadians which could help make healthy living a realty.
Deficits are not sustainable in the long term.  Canadian homes only work if they earn more than they spend, yet Canada's government's debt continues to rise in contrast to this given the way we manage it.  Given the glut of baby boomers which will make the population and health care more top heavy, this will compound the effect.  I love Canada and am blessed to have been born here.  I believe we need to re-evaluate our situation to ensure we are making the wise decisions.
Have a very strong interest in the Natural Health and Wellness Industry and for the Government to allow people to have a choice in whether they go to a Public Medical Clinic or a Natural Health and Wellness Clinic, both covered by a public health card. Another issue is the Seniors, to give them every possible advantage to help them stay in their home with all the help they need at no cost to them and have coverage for all, and not just some so they can stay in their home.
When we let immigrants come into Canada, they should not expect to be given everything on a silver platter. They should learn to be Canadian and not expect us to change our laws to fit them. Canada was grown by immigrants from Eastern Europe after the 2nd WW. They were not given a home and monies every month. Neither should the new ones. If you want to work and live here, do it on OUR roles. Make them take a very indepth security check, before they are allowed to come.  
I am disappointed in the way discourse is handled in Question Period. The constant heckling while people are trying to address the Speaker with their 'question' or 'response' in no way contributes to a productive process. It is insulting to the intelligence of the public to allow it to continue like this unabated, as if undermining someone like this affects public opinion. It is merely disgraceful and shameful behaviour that is downright embarrassing to have to witness.
1. Poverty elimination in Canada  2. Jobs and/or education available to all (including those of us over 50)  3. Really, everything on the list is important, but living in a country as great as Canada, Canadians should not be homeless or working so hard just to live in poverty.  Having to choose between rent and food is ridiculous.  All the monthly bills go up, yet the raises never seem to make up for that.  It is very difficult to get a start or a re-start these days.
I listened to a fascinating lecture on Open Government and open data about 4 years ago. I believe it was held at the NRC. They had wonderful arguments as to why Open Government was so beneficial to society. They gave the example of a community Africa that could decide which neighborhood was the safest, had good schools and good housing.  All of these Canadians take for granted but providing information to society to help them make informed choices should be the norm. 
-Statistics Canada raw data being available directly to citizens, including public servants (not just academics)  -Open Data (accessible, timely/current, broad topics: generally improving the existing opendata portal and offerings)  -Compendium of open data for FPT and municipalities (supporting and engaging other levels of government)  -Support for open data conferences, groups, etc. to increase awareness and engagement at grassroots levels and to empower the public
It is VERY important that fish farms be banned, they are killing natural species and this source of culture, history and lifestyle is crucial to First Nations people. By allowing them to remain in traditional territories the Government is not respecting their ways. It's a traditional food source as well as cultural teachings and beliefs. Many First Nations are protesting and trying to get them off their land, to no avail. To speak of the TRC without this is useless.
The Liberal government has demonstrated quite clearly that, though it likes to "hear" what Canadian's think and what is important to us it really does not care...such lip service with no action/accountability is almost infuriating...do you really think that the majority of hard-working Canadian's want to see their hard-earned tax dollars funneled directly into the middle east? Obviously what is important to us is not being heard but the current Liberal government...
Enabling directors, director generals to make decisions and reducing the politics in core decision making.  Properly resourcing key functions in the government such as procurement, human resources, real estate services, pay and benefits so they can provide the services that programs need OR stop the centralization of these services and embed them in the programs so they can function again.  Put the emphasis back on the work and outcomes rather then the processes.
I want the current government to quit parading around as if it is an election year and get to working on serious issues especially with regard to looking after canadian residents, senior life long tax paying citizens are getting less health and dental benefits than the "newly welcomed immigrants" AND Military personnel must be treated much better in both employment and after there duties, and definitely if they are injured in combat they should be taken care of.
Government should encourage people to make suggestions on how to improve day to day operations of their dealings with government, to save money or make operations more efficient, and if they have a good idea, that can be applies to other service, reward them....  This may be a good step towards getting more to participate in making government more cost effective at the same time as improving the relations between those who serve and those who are being served.
When there is a need for new ideas for any reason, do not be afraid to seek the odd answer. Ask the community about certain subjects, and let them give any answer. It does not matter if it is silly, or strange. Ideas of any kind open up paths in our brains, so that we can structure better plans, and ideas. Also, sometimes when looking for answer do not be afraid to ask someone completely unrelated to the problem. Fresh eyes are always good for and scenario.
The federal government today seems to be out of tune with the majority of society, in the sense of how decisions, and inaction on major environmental, social and economic issues, affect Canadians in their everyday lives. How is it for example, that after all these years of financial support to First Nations, that most First Nation communities still live in dire and deplorable conditions? That is something government and most Canadians should be ashamed of!
ACTIVE LIVING:  When I chose "Healthy Canadians" it was to have the government promote healthy ACTIVE living by supporting/funding programs which encourage this lifestyle.  I did not choose this to allow increased spending on "Health Care", though ACTIVE LIVING will easily payback through less healthcare costs.  Simple quick government programs include grants for new trail plans, new sports centers, and new parks which encourage active outdoor recreation.
Campian commitments not being met by government elect,   What ever happened to public servants and how come the government elect entitles themselves? This is the most frustrating part of government, don't they know they were 'elected' to serve the public. Government seems they feel 'entitled' to serve themselves. This is very sad and depressing for the rest of us who elected gov. and leaves us thinking we are the betrayed and it is never going to change. 
Open government requires a robust and secure technology infrastructure. If all departments defer to SSC for their data centre provision, there would exist a single point of possible failure that would be devastating across all sectors. (Think Phoenix)  Open government is a properly managed and compensated government. If they can't properly manage a basic function like payroll, why should we have confidence that they are managing other data any better?
Canadians who are born in this country should have the right to immidiate access of all programs without discrimination,example I am a canadian born here,small wage earner but slightly over and threshold of welfare. I have to make a decision between prescription medication or food expense. Why does an immigrant come before a tax payer and canadian born citizen at their beck and call. I have 3 canadian born children whom are all tax payers as well....
If you have a healthy population you will save money over all and long term.  Immigration policy should include an orientation course which includes either Working French or Working English dependant upon where they settle in Canada.  Language policy should be funded reflecting culture and commerce based on location in Canada. i.e. in Vancouver B.C. government would fund Working English as a second language (commerce) and Mandarin Chinese (culture).
Support for grassroots and community projects and organizations - the vital influence of friends and neighbours becomes very apparent when disasters strike, the silver lining when everyday heroes kindle brotherhood - but consistently strong community bonds can make a huge impact on the physical and mental well-being of individuals who in turn create a healthy and motivated citizen base, reducing the need for all sorts of   government aid spending.
Health care  What is the government doing to find a cure for the disease that affects more Canadians than citizens in any other country in the world?  What is our government doing in 2018 to erradicate multiple sclerosis?  What funds is the government willing to offer Canadians with MS (and other chronic diseases) so we can be positive, contributing members of society.  And when, oh when, are condos obligated to be accessible for wheel chairs?!!
If the finance minister has broken the rules show us the result.  If the defence minister has lied about military involvement......show us the result.  Do not let the tax cheats off the hook via the CRA.......they need to be held accountable.  Tell us full Truth not the part you want us to hear.   Immigrants should all be able to speak English when arriving.   Open government means "reality" facts not bureacrats facts built to fit the situation.
I don't believe for a minute we have an open government.  They all have their own agendas and don't give any consideration to the individual.  The example - thousands of federal employees not getting paid or not getting paid properly, and the Senate has the ability to get themselves a new pay system, but continues to hang their employees out to dry.  Too much lip service saying they're doing what they can - that's not the least bit accountable.
One aspect is actually the protection of privacy of individual citizens. In a previous question, one of the options was for government departments to share information about citizens. Absolutely NOT! Each and every citizen must be contacted when one government department wants to share information with another government department. For example, someone's medical information should not be shared at random between other government departments. 
Currently my major interests and concerns are; Trump, the legalization of marijuana; price and taxation, as a medicinal marijuana patient I currently pay 2 and 3 times the price of blackmarket products and I am paying GST on this prescription, I do not pay GST on any other prescribed medications like toridol or dilaudid and should not have to for marijuana. My Licensed producers inform me of another price increase coming due to taxes....   
Facility reaching government officials should be a given. I did not 'waste' one of my 3 choices on that selection but it is very important, especially since for some marginalized Canadians, it is a barrier.  Also, CONNECTIVITY. I live less than 25 KM from Ottawa, yet we do not have access yet to Broadband. This is unacceptable in a developed nation like ours. Disenfranchised rural rsidents have the same rights as their urban counterparts.
When I see in my daily life that how government funding is wasted and how the glitch in a plan is exploited, I feel frustrated. The planning that is meant to be solving a problem creates more problem. I think there must a system which can evaluate that; whether a planning is working or in behind in getting its' target results? A service receiver/client is a best person to tell the government if their planning is working for them or not.   
Democratic reform which liberals promised to review but didn't.  Transparency should be linked to this initiative.  Does it make any sense that a government with 40% popular support gets to make important decisions on policy that 60% of Canadians do not agree with.  Maybe there is better alternative than first past the post. This would go a long way to building legitimacy which is ultimate objective of transparent open government.  Right?
I want government to work for the people not for the corporations or big lobby groups. I understand people like to join forces to make more of an impact, but let's look at individuals and families and strive to do the best for all of them not just the ones working hard to achieve wealth. Continue to support them in a way that works but boost supports, access to health and education for the most needy to improve and lift them up as well. 
I would like to see 'Open' government in the political elements of government.  These questions deal solely with operation elements of the civil service, which is nice but often too late in game.  We can all see the horrible outcomes from closed government in projects like phoenix and their 80,000 business rules. What idiocy drove the politicians to believe that this fiasco was ready to launch?  Answering that would be open government. 
Just to reiterate.... A concerted effort made for transparency in Expense submissions and spending habits for each person in our Government. And where there's a discrepancy, it be made public via traditional news services. I believe we're entitled to this and we need it.  So much bad blood, mistrust and disdain has seeped into our psyche and we need it to go away. We need and want to trust our Government. We need to put this behind us.
The list of choices to choose upon in your survey are all important and cannot be limited to top 3 most important choices that you guys want the survey participant to choose from. Getting all the pertinent data to citizens as much as possible is very important for transparency. It should not be limited. It will help citizen to have a broader knowledge. Broad knowledge will help citizens to come up with better conclusions and decisions.
Set up progressive tax - the rich people make they money on poor and middle class Canadians  Make all government official and workers paycheques same as other workers in country  Make government officials & managers financial  responsible for they designs , to not overspend budget   Make healthcare system same in all country and include dental with no limits.   make everyone pay in healthcare in progressive scale depend on income     
1. First of all, I express my sincere thanks for the opportunity given to share my views  2. I wish to migrate to Canada with my family and serve the Country in best possible ways  3. Encourage my children, son is a Mechanical Engineer, our daughter is a doing her Chartered Accountancy ... to be exemplary citizens of this great Country, Canada  4. Use/Impart my Seven years of rich Port Logistics knowledge in Car Imports & Exports   
There must be a process of accountability by special interest groups when lobbying the government - i.e. no short cut to government officials & complete disclosure to public - no cheating allowed!  The courts' opinions should not over-rule current government's decisions and laws, without providing critical & pertinent reasons that current law is wrong.  These decisions ought to reflect international standards & those of the U.N.   
We IMMEDIATELY need a way to hold the government and the Prime Minister accountable for their actions and/or their lack of action.  This current government has not done a thing that their platform, that got them elected, said they would do for Canadians and I dont know of any Canadian that agrees with all of the money that has been given overseas while we have real, unaddressed problems in our own country that are being ignored.
Dont changer Canadas value just to accommodate immigrant culture or tradition or believe. Any one comes to Canada by choice must accept Canadas value and become 100% Canadian. In short, dont allow others to create their own country within Canada. People can practice their tradition or believe but if their culture or religion collides with Canadas way of living, Canadas way must prevail at all time, no negotiation on that.
Progress in closing gaps as well as progress of commissions:  -income inequality; social mobility; progress of women; truth and reconciliation; missing and murdered women; indigenous youth - educational equality; indigenous peoples -- areas in crisis (e.g., boiled water advisories, poor housing) -- would be great to see targets and progress; homeless file ( as above, would be great to see targets and progress to those targets).
All government documents should be available to Canadians. All government business must be officially recorded (no more personal phones/accounts or verbal agreements). All MPs should be required to place their finances into a blind trust, or better, to divest all assets with the proceeds held in an account relevant to Canadians, like the CPP. They would thus be invented to manage public monies in the interest of all Canadians.
My grandchildren not having to pay for this Liberal governments frivolous spending   Small businesses being forced to pay exorbitant taxes   Consideration of Western Canada/Alberta and not so focused on the handouts going to ON/PQ  Less focus on taking "selfies" and more on stimulating the Alberta economy  Responsible spending of our tax dollars  The government (especially the PM) being accountable for their actions/spending  
We need to look at people on Social assistant there are many still that should not be on the system, and other fall thru the cracks and are homeless some even veterans. Seniors some work all the life the pension cheque is only 238.00 they and if they are aware some are not they qualify for a supplement, they still make less then the ones on social assistants and have trouble finding housing that is safe clean and affordable.  
1-Women's Rights = equal pay in the workplace; equal opportunity for women to access well paying job; Dismantling old-boys clubs & creating more inclusive work culture in all industries;     2 - Compensation plan for unpaid labour of stay at home parent and other caregivers programs to recognize the economic value of women's    3 - Capacity development for minorities to increase their access to opportunities and employment   
The government needs to help the Canadian people by out lawing certain practices. One major harm for the Canadian work force is employment agencies. These agencies are just pimps, getting paid to send people to unsafe, untrained, non pension, non benefit jobs. Canadians need safe and secure employment. If Canadians can go to work each day for a fair wage, a fair pension and fair benefits this Country would be a better place. 
it would be nice for a change, if the current liberal government would tell Canadians   how it plans to defend our sovereignty instead of just dancing around the question with bullshit.   the last conservative government did an excellent job communicating that and procuring defence assets to protect our country,  the same cannot be said for this government, when are we getting new fighter aircraft/  navy ships?  no one knows
A specific case to demonstrate something that is working and a plea to make this the norm and not the exception. For OC Transpo, current bus locations are made available, allowing private interests to create bus tracking applications. The commitment to making the data available and usable in a partnership relationship to leverage private industry to create valuable service offerings is something I would like to see more of.
Government officials don't seem to be accountable for their mistakes.  How can you build a more "reasonable" system of checks and balances that keep people honest?  Also, the forecasting process in Government is VERY antiquated and makes liars out of the Departments.  It needs to be revamped.  Probably good to get some kids involved who are not "invested" in the outcomes of power and prestige to figure out the solutions!  
immigration limits should be zero. we are already overpopulated in cities like Toronto. Our own children cannot afford or find housing in the city in which they were born. This is a disgrace.  Face coverings should be banned in all areas of Canada. This is a rude. ignorant practice. It is not religious or cultural. It is just plain stupid.  We talk about equality of women and then allow this stone-age practice to continue.
I believe in Canada ... made in Canada, Canadian industry, Canadian's safety by vetting and controlling borders, Canadian standards need to be maintained.  Our country is great and our history needs to be protected.  Canada is a democratic country, being deceived by socialists, communists, and environmentalists takes away from our freedoms and turns our country into a place similar to the places people are fleeing from.  
I want the federal government to be more accessible to those who choose not to communicate over the internet.  Key departments or agencies like the CRA have closed offices and cashiers across the country, resulting in making it more difficult for individuals to communicate in PERSON.  Especially cashiers in offices to accept payments for payments du e to the CRA.  The more choice offered, the easier it is to be compliant.
More updated information about how government departments work, what specific projects they are working on, and important milestones.  Let officials explain more to Canadians!    More connections between officials.  At my department, we reinvent the wheel multiple times.  If we could put more manuals and explanations on-line, we would be much more efficient.  Most policies and procedures could be available to Canadians.  
I think that if politics is to evolve beyond populism and pocketbook issues, we need to be able to have an informed population. Ensuring that Canadians are educated about government (including new immigrants), effecting change and general policy will help to engage people more meaningfully and move the country forward with an eye on long-term progress. One cannot have productive conversation with an uninformed citizenry.
Explain to me why my mother who has worked her entire life for this country receives a pension that barely covers her needs while a refugee can receive twice the amount in assistance? Explain to me why you are not taking care of the people who have given everything for this country. I truly want to help others around the world. I firmly believe it is a moral responsibility but I also believe in caring for our own first.
I would like to see a report listing the Food Safety and Health Safety regulations that were repealed by the previous government being re-instated. Such as CFIA's role as an Inspection Agency, Fertilizer Regulations, Animal Feeds Regulations, Sections of the Food & Drug Regulations that were repealed to allow industry to police itself, rather than meet the expected high standards most Canadians still think are in place.
Taxation on us is far too much and I notice so much waste in Government spending.  We vote our representatives in office but we as citizens are not consulted on how and were you spend our tax dollars. That concerns me greatly. I work hard for survival but I'm taxed super heavy for doing that. We reward people that are capable of working to stay home and rely on government to support them but chastize the ones that work.
I want open information on the travel costs, conference costs and all conflict of interest documents for the prime minister, all the ministers, the presidents, vice presidents, commissioners, right down to the lowest level of employee.   I want justification as to why some government employees HAD TO go to Orlando Florida for a learning conference when so much information on learning is online. This stuff has to STOP!
The government should provide free services for single mothers, senior citizens and help decrease criminal activities since legal aid does not cover all services for the poor people of Canada to be aided, Invest in free services for all whom desperately need it. I am truly and  so disappointed at the lack and limited services the government provide for poor people. A change must happen to help people.                
1-Reduction or elimination of imbedded lobbyists that overinfluence the political agenda!  2-move to a more democratic voting structure like a  proportional representative system  3-for fair & open government eliminate fund raising and advertising in politics other than funding each party equally from the Consolidated Revenue Fund(CRF) to eliminate the strong control imposed by big business and wealthy interests!
Fix or scrap Phoenix.  It is completely disgraceful that the issue has gone on this long and was allowed to grow so large when it was obvious from the start there were issues.  Employees should receive compensation for this regardless of whether they were physically impacted or just had to live with the psychological stress of not knowing if their pay will be there when it is supposed to and for the right amount.
A recent article I came across where "The examination by Canada's Auditor General Michael Ferguson into whether the Canada Revenue Agencys nine call centres were providing Canadian taxpayers with timely access to accurate information, found that call centre agents only answered the phone about one-third of the time."  wasn't really new information.  It just confirmed what some of us already believe to be true.
Having had to navigate the federal government systems quite a bit recently, I have found it extremely frustrating when trying to get ahold of the right information. Whether I am going through the federal web sites or calling a toll free number, information is needlessly complicated to find. I think having better organized online content, with focus on less repetition and more clarity, would be very beneficial. 
Prime ministerial system of government is boring and uninteresting. Citizens are not motivated to vote because, they hardly know or understand who to vote for, in all positions other than the office of the prime minister. Please, let us advocate and switch to Presidential system of government like in the United States. That will enkindle the fire in citizens' enthusiasm and participation in politics/elections.
1- No more paying out of millions for war crimes or CSIS mistakes. Enough is enough. Apologize if required and move on!!!  2- Stop allowing courts to change into a system that promotes easy money lawsuits.   3- Stop letting criminals go because some modern, fake timeline for court action has been created. Again this ridiculous Charter of Rights lobby has succeeded in making our country legal system a joke!! 
A safe and secure policy by our govt is essential to our country and indiscriminate or careless immigration may well be a huge issue. Cert ainly moral and conflicting views by ministers as well as integrity, honesty and loyalty should be set as very high standards of behaviour. Control and reduction of spending that harms the well being of Canadians should be cause for remedial action at all levels of govt.
There was a national forum asking Canadians to provide ideas and comments on how we should look after our natural environment.  I made some suggestions and do not recall ever hearing back from the government.  The person in charge of reducing our eco-footprint should consider the following:  be available for individual dicussion with Canadians, and, set up local eco-sustainability groups in every community.
Government should be run in a way more in line with a business. People should not be guaranteed raises or promotions simply because they have been there for ages. Government officials should be easily fire able and the government elected officials should actually work together. When Conservatives say that there job for the next 4 year is to prevent the liberals from doing anything it is disheartening...
I want government to be fully transparent about the partnerships in which they enter with the corporate world, such as making obvious the shift to using private banking login information to access accounts on government websites. If the government sees its relationship with the public as a transactional one, no different than that of the public with private corporations, then at least be clear about it.
I would like to be able to find information on the Government of Canada's websites. The more "open" things get, the less actual information is available. The current policy that only allows information of interest to the public on the internet is not helpful. The public includes many knowledgeable and literate people, whose interests are not served by dumbing down the websites and removing information. 
Take care of the Natives.  I am aware they have been renamed.  The Liberal Party was elected, and I believe it was just a moment and a glimmer of hope within Reserves.  I believe you have done nothing to keep that glimmer alive.  They were here long before me. As a non-native it surprised me this was the one that has bothered me the most.  It's shameful.  The entire Federal Government should be ashamed.
Trustworthy ministers in government.  I feel PM Trudeau and Minister Morneau need to do a lot of work to earn back trust of Canadians.  They preach tax fairness but hid(e) money themselves - this is not fairness.  Fairness would be to give all Canadians the opportunities they have.  They should open doors for Canadians to keep their money in Canada and invest in Canada without over taxing these people.
Natives receive excessive amounts of government money that in turn is mismanaged. But if anyone even suggests an audit they are automatically labelled a racist. Native communities and leaders (who award themselves huge salaries) need to be held accountable for how they use the money they receive just like any government department AND it needs to be easily accessible to see by the rest of Canadians 
The 'standard' of what is expected of all employees must be upheld. Seems that the government has done a good job in hiring a more demographically ( which I agree with - government needs to lead), but has done a terrible job in mentorship. To many managers with minimal experience is costing the government MEGA $$$. In time, people learn and hopefully mentorship will happen on the next time around. 
Accessability - right now most people think its impossible to get involved politically.  Mandatory MP hours or days would solve a lot of this.  MP's should be serving their municipalities, not just getting drunk in Ottawa on the tax payers bill.  This would add a new level of transparency and show people in Ottawa what Canadians really want, then people in Ottawa can figure out how to get it done.
Fixing the issue with the Phoenix pay system for federal employees.    Expanding Trade partners so that Canada is not as heavily dependant on US economy  More energy efficient programs/rebates for Canadians in non major cities  More citizen input in major issues from MPs instead of having to "toe the party line"  More accountability from Senators/MPs with regards to expenses (i.e. Travel expenses)
Recent large scale consolidation exercises have proven not to work and to be very costly to Canadians (Phoenix, Shared Services Canada, Gun Registry, etc.). Stop implementing these large scale projects that sound good on paper but are ineffective and inefficient. Related to this issue is the need for accountability of senior executives making these decisions to implement projects that don't work! 
There is always a better way! Efficient government is good government. Don't waste our tax dollars and incorporate continuous improvement initiatives into government governance. Have bonuses for not spending all of the budget not simply because you work for the government, have key performance measurable with a goal of year over year increase in efficiency, anyone can do a poor job and over spend.
I wish, if the government can revise the performance of all organization/department that are suppose to provide help to new immigrants. They seems like share the predefine literature/brochure with everyone. I am afraid they are not that effective. New immigrants are struggling with getting jobs, as they are told by hiring managers that they can't be hired as they don't have Canadian experience. 
single working class people can not afford to buy a house or be counted from the census perspective. Census reports and statistical data is only concerned with families. Large segments of the population can not afford to have children or to establish roots especially in the province of Nova Scotia. A culture of migration is constant for generations of Canadians who simply do not have choices. 
Conflict of interest investigations should include the possibility of meaningful penalties for violators.  Freedom of information requests should have strict timelines for compliance and meaningful penalties for non compliance.  All government data should be biased towards being open by default unless compelling reasons exist to the contrary, and those reasons should be subject to challenge.
Sound government spending with accountability and transparency. Fair hiring. Rejuvenating government does not mean pushing to immediately bridge university students in at mid-career classifications; on the other hand, years of service does not always equate to more experience either.  There is a fine balance and hiring managers should be more accountable and justify promotional appointments.
trudeau needs to be tried with treason and jailed. why arent you doing anything?? why do you want the take over. i need to speak to the fed govt members to ask. i send emails but i get no answers. people are afraid. we are being quelled here. i got scammed as i filled out a fraud visa lottery as im  afraid in canada here, and i want OUT. wake up. trudeau is a muslim, and we are the infidels.
On the Canada revenue agency I'd like to see the T1 that is sent to you every year so it is possible for me to see where I went wrong when you send me an avis de cotisation & saying that you made a correction, and where you got that information. It does not happen often but I feel helpless when I receive it. Like one person told me once when this happen to me: ( If we sent it just pay it).
1) Reforming our Election process/system to make it more democratic and representative of all voters in Canada..eg; change to a Proportional Representation system and elect members to the Senate midway to national elections.   2) Work closely with other Governments, individuals bodies, Ngo's and individuals to alleviate and eradicate hunger, poverty and illiteracy throughout the World.   
Yes, accountability and transparency in Open Government.  It does not exist today, otherwise the Parliamentary Budget Officer could of received data from CRA on the tax gap.  That is but one small example where transparency does not exist.  Another would be the lack of transparency surrounding Phoenix, which unless things change, will top a billion dollars and become another Gun Registry.
1.Being able to define what is " middle class"  It is a term that is thrown around yet it has no basis of definition in the ordinary understanding as a Canadian.   2. Government acknowledgement of small business budgeting that allows Canadians to fund their own retirement rather than implementing tax strategies that tax those savings, which will in turn increase government dependency.  
The government needs to address the public about its intentions on changing laws BEFORE the decision is made (ie. legalization of marijuana, re-writing school curriculum), get honest feedback, and take an in-depth look at how those changes have impacted other countries, provinces, and municipalities. One of the government's most important roles is to protect the family - NOT destroy it!
All of the things mentioned should be a priority. But mostly healthy Canadians. Please look to ensuring we are looking after our own people before we commit to looking after others. We need to make sure Canadians are healthy and secure, financially stable before we start bringing in more people or sending billions to other countries. Fix our problems first then look to helping others. 
Personal taxation (at all levels, i.e. income tax, sales tax, excise tax) needs to be examined in depth and recalibrated.  Lower and middle-class individuals need to have reduced levels of taxation.  Higher income earners should be taxed at a higher rate of tax, as well as reduction or elimination of most personal tax credits and/or benefits/allowances for the families of such earners.
1: My biggest concern is the influence of the US Government electoral system and methods that is being felt by Canadians.  I do not believe that 3rd political advertising has accountability or a means for tracking funds spent.    2: The other problem that is creeping into the political system is FAKE NEWS or FAKE INFORMATION, there appears to be less accountability in todays politics.
I believe taxing hourly employee after 8 hrs of work or over 40 hours a week should be taxed lower for overtime hours and 1 percent of the wealthy people should pay more tax give more back to middle class citizen who are our biggest consumers.  Politicians hours should be documented and open because majority of people i know dont believe they work a minumum 8 hours or 40 hours a week 
There are three priorities that the government should be working on.  As they are responsibilities of three different ministries, they should be number one priority in those ministries: 1. Veterans Affairs; get their act together. 2. Native issues: it is time to stop apologising and start providing solutions. 3.  Public Service; At some point you have to implement a solution for pay.
I care very much for a healthy Canada.  I've been coast to coast, it's an incredible country.  Globally, I'm always hoping Canadians are welcome everywhere, and I hope Canada welcomes everyone.  I'd still like elders and those in homes to be cared for much more, instead of cutting health care, provide help.  Marijiana (pot) is a solution, but not the answer.  That's just my 2 cents.
The government needs to use science-based decision making when considering Climate Change mitigation and adaptation. All policies of all levels of government and all government entities need to be in line with the current climate science. They are not!! Making economic growth a top priority will make meeting greenhouse gas targets impossible and will lead to devasting consequences.
Clean up government. There are things that occur in the workplace that our being kept under cover so that they don't come out to the public. Much like sexual harassement from upper management. But instead of dealing with this issue, executives in Ottawa give these managers great references to obtain a promotion in another department. Ex. *****Personal Information Removed***** 
I as a public servant deserve to be paid properly.  My husband and I are both affected by this Phoenix issue and nobody is accountable.  He has been paid incorrectly for a year and half and nobody will help us.  I am also owed earnings.  This is unacceptable and would not be allowed in the private sector.  It is breaking the labour laws and nobody is doing anything about it. 
Canadian Leadership abroad on Open Data and government is essential as part of our foreign strategy. Integrating our OGP (Open Government Partnership) commitment as co-chairs into other areas (wherever possible) of international engagements, such as in development, is essential to achieving better results, and fostering a more stable, democratic society in different places. 
Manitoba needs to cut useless government workers and use what would have been their salary to reduce government debt. Pay structure should be performance based, for example the visa processing office. It should not take half a year to get a work visa after graduation. There are too many low-efficiency government workers. This increases national debt and nothing gets done. 
Protecting the Federal rights of English Canadians living in the Province of Quebec.  Quite sad that when you call the post office in Arundel Quebec you are told NOT to call unless you can speak with the Post Office employee in French - this is unacceptable as part of our taxes contribute to the salaries of all Federal employees and no-one should be treated with disrespect
There needs to be accountability in the public service / government. The phoenix debacle / fiasco is a really good example illustrating the lack of accountability in the public service. Who was accountable for the systematic failure? If someone was, this was not communicated to stakeholders, e.g. public servants. In the public service, the CEO / board would be fired.   
Technology should be used more to make information accessible when possible and get more people into decision making. People should be able to submit projects and vote for projects via technology and other means if necessary. It would also be interresting to have intelligent systems used to organize our activities and resources in a globally  open and inclusive manner.
Canadians need to realize that the Gov't cannot 'fix' everything and that we, as Canadians, much like our elected Gov't, are also accountable for our decisions and actions and must take responsibility for them. We, independently and as a collective, have to start doing our part to ensure our Country continues to grow and develop holistically and stop 'point fingers'. 
Listen to the people that elected you. Don't just blindly follow the socially trendy directions. Dont introduce and promote meaningless laws such as carbon tax ant treat us like idiots and trll us that its revenue neutral and going to make a difference. No carbon credits for anyone. Stop playing at government and take responability and accountabilityfor your actions.
Thank you for providing me with this opportunity for providing feedback. I believe that a strong nation is one that is constituted by highly educated and innovative people working together towards solving today's issues. For these reasons, I would like to see more government investment in primary, secondary and post secondary education as well as scientific research.
Members of Parliament, including the Prime Minister, should be required to answer questions when asked with real answers and information. They should not just repeat talking points and non-answers like this current government is doing (Trudeau, Morneau, and all the rest of the current government who only answer in talking points, thereby disrespecting all Canadians)
The time has come to make fiscal accountability significantly more transparent to Canadians.  Advocate for federal law requiring all levels of government to publish a detailed independent audit of finances prior to every elections. Let's get off the hamster wheel of "well intention" elections promises - followed by blaming the previous gov't for all shortcomings.  
There is no greater requirement than to protect our environment - earth, water, air. Fracking should be illegal in Canada, full disclosure (at minimum available through internet) of ingredients should be required on all products    that our bodies are exposed to (food, cosmetic, drugs). We need to find more ways to market our environment instead of destroying it.
Putting the brakes on out of control spending. Answering the questions up front and honestly with a clear and consice response. Federal and Provincial integration to allow projects to be approved in a more timely manner to boost economic growth for both factions. Freedom of speech and the end of "political correctness" as it is a means to end freedom of speech. 
This current government is being driven by an ideology that is not open to discourse about the dangerous world we now live in. The past 8 yrs have resulted in democracy and the Free World being driven backwards by totalitarian, terrorist and theocratic regimes. Unless, government accepts that there are alternative views, then a facade of openess is irrelevant. 
1.  Quick (within 3 weeks) response to requests for face to face meetings at all levels.  Meetings to be carried out within 3 months.  2.  Access to all transcripts of meetings held regarding lyme disease, attendees, decisions made and next steps.  3.  Understanding of relationship between AMMI and Public Health of Canada, re decisions on lyme disease strategy
Canada has an opportunity to be one of the most modern government's in the world. Please keep up these initiatives to improve and simplify the work that you're doing. Our country should collaborate openly with our government and work together to prosper. Thank you for this work - please don't stop pursuing your goals! We will benefit greatly from your efforts.
The previous question only allowed 3 issues of importance. I understand this is necessary form compilation purposes but it is too restrictive; many other choices are important, too.  I would also like to see more prompt response from government members. I wrote an email to the Prime Minister in February and did not receive a response until July (from an aide).
Yes, I would like to see more accountability amongst our elected officials.  They hide behind parliamentary privilege, meanwhile regular workers are made to feel like criminals.  Hold the right people accountable.  If we really want accountability then throw a few politicians in jail when they contravene laws.  Then perhaps the rest of them will pay attention.
Having CRA answer phone calls in a timely fashion, have agent you can understand and that have the correct information you require, processing of T1adj, post assessments, interest relief, notice of objections etc. in a timely fashion, 6 to 12 months is totally unacceptable.  why is it that clients are  only given from 30 to 45 days to respond to CRA requests?
Comment: the 16 strategic items listed in previous question conceptually overlap in ways as objectives, so difficult to answer accurately. If keeping the listed items as is, should ask as an ordinal ranking question to get more utility out of responses. Hence the emphasis on technical performance, measurement, and evaluation research capacity in government. 
Legalization of all vistomless crimes.  the era of incarceration for expressing freedoms is over.  very little is illegal anymore, just things that adversely affect others only please.    Also!!!!   reign in the corporate oligarchy and the unfair profitability regimes they use to monopolize their income streams.  no more misleading ads or business "promises"
The entire Government in general needs to be more accountable. Changes to the privacy Act  and the access to information act to include a mechanism for enforcement to the office of the Privacy Commissioner and the Office of the Information commissioner. If the department does not want to hand over information there ois very litle recourse for an individual. 
Lets fix our military. Recruiting is bogged down in red tape. Capital acquisitions of major equipment is a world wide standing joke. The size of our military is a joke. Our military capability is minimal. So much for a safe and secure Canada. We don't have a clue what is going on up in our North. The US and Russia do however and now, no doubt, the Chinese. 
Government should regulate and monitor services related to Canadian citizens and should not be directly providing the services.  Example, Drivers Licensing services should be private run to increase efficiency with strict government controls and monitoring. Same for all "services" unless the government can cut the inefficiency in our existing services.  
1. Canada as a global leader in social justice, equity for all citizens, poverty reduction, a strong constitution, peace building and sustainable environment is more important on the global stage than ever before.  We must uphold the values, we as Canadians hold dear and to not buy into divisive politics we witness elsewhere on the international stage. 
1.  Clean, Clear Healthy Water.  Without this, we will all die.  It should be a right, not a privilege.  2.  Cleaner, healthier renewable energies.  STOP with the Fossil fuels... Stop the TAR Sands and Pipelines.  No Kinder Morgan.  3.  Preserve the natural environments that we currently have...Great Bear Rainforest, The marine sanctuaries. the Arctic.
Complaint mechanism that really work instead of the useless agencies that deal with the abuse of the taxpayer and consumers when it some to airlines and telecoms. We need a government that is truly concerned about middle class and lower class Canadians and doesn't only make mentions of them in cheap election slogans and non answers in Question Period. 
How do we repair the growing "them against us" attitude that is felt between the public and private sectors. The private sector struggling to meet the demands of the public sector. The mounting tax burdens placed on the private sector to elevate the standard of living for the public sector. All do not benefit when public services are over compensated. 
Often, online government consultations (at various levels) "atomize" the public. Don't do that.  Don't hide behind privacy rules when personal information is not at stake.   One of the best models I have seen is CanLII which is a comprehensive index of tribunal and court decisions (as well as laws - including past versions). More of that would be good.
More proportionate receivable effort for outstanding tax evaders based upon total dollar amount. If you want to pursue tax 10 cheats in a month, why would you not target those with incomes exceeding $90 000 (representative of the top 10% of earners in Canada.) Re-engineer the Unemployment Insurance program which pays out $40m / year yet requires $45m
Open Government must work beyond its foundations in 'openness, accountability, and transparency' and work to further embrace the key principles of inclusion, participation and impact both nationally and provincially. We need to see some questions around those principles if we want to be truly 'engaged' with the public in proving 'engaging' open data.
Give medical cannabis a DIN number so Canadians in need of CBD are not victimized further by the over priced providers who are already pouring funds into accounts at Revenue Canada. Hiding behind the poorly enacted century old medical practice of synthetic pharmacology can no longer hold back the well being of honest hardworking taxpaying Canadians.
Government must be able to accommodate citizen's issues and ideas and study them in detail. Wherever possible, government should ensure timeline defined action items on suggestions or resolving issues.   Also employment is an important part for everyone. Canada must expand our growth model to provide employment opportunities to almost all residents.
Ease of access is important, such as:  having few links to click to get the information; using plain language but not so plain as to miss the point; having information from the user's point of view.  Up-to-date information is also important, however, when it is updated, there are times when comparing it to previous information/iterations is useful.
eHealth - we need a federal piece of legislation to standardize eHealth opportunities in all provinces and territories  environmental commitment - we need policies and solid action plans that prioritize the protection of our natural resources and environment without the push and lobbying from large corporations that have interest in exploiting them
I believe technology could make it very easy for people to vote on desicions impotant to them and follow government progress as well as learn about candidates, lobbyists and opportunities to work for the benifit of canada and its people. Re-creatig platforms like Facebook can be used to allow every willing citizen to be heard and to stay informed!
The last set of choices was slanted.  1) dignity of all persons, their information, fundamental freedoms, rights, entitlements and responsibilities  2) equity: telling the truth and reconciliation for the future  3) use of openness to live up to Canada's commitments to international legal instruments such as treaties, conventions and declarations.
Making everything concerning government operations and program design and delivery that's currently published only to GCpedia and the GC Intranet available via the Internet to Canadians, and thereby, the policy research community outside government. in this regard, the government of Canada is much less transparent today than it was 5 years ago. 
The government needs more focus and action on increasing and providing affordable rentals, increasing income, stability, health and dental care, and affordable food to Persons with Disabilities who are unable/incapable of working, and their children. To help pull them out of the poverty unfairly bestowed upon them for simply being born disabled.
1. Being able to talk to someone in government when we have a concern and having that concern addressed with a clear answer (not having to be on hold for a long time for a call centre agent, not having our concerns brushed aside). If a call centre agent does not have the answer to a client's question, he/she should refer it to someone who does.
A government that is for the best interests of the Canadian people not the best interests of whatever international group needs support now. We are facing health crisis, mental health crisis, opioid addiction and homelessness in this country; lets manage these issues before we start trying to save the world. Also, lets pay our public servants. 
Canada is making a mistake by funding refugee immigration.  On a per capita basis, more is spent on refugees than is spent on Canadian citizens who have worked in Canada most of their lives.  "Charity begins at home" should still apply.  Look after our own people better (health care, pensions, etc.) rather than spending our money on immigrants.
Helps Small Business Start-Ups with 0 year base. (As normal BDC doesn't help Businesses., unless. Otherwise, has been established for 2-5/yrs.)., in a way that a time the Small Business Owner., doesn't required any more helps. The old ways., it doesn't make sense. Why would Small Business., asked for helps after succeeding for example 5/yrs. ? 
In my opinion, another important aspect should be monitoring the "waste" of government funds and living within a balanced budget.  There are too many middle layers of government officials and over paid board members and far too little front line workers.  Abolish the Senate or have them sit as a volunteer with $1 day salary and no extra perks.
As a citizen, my first and utmost important issue is safety for all Canadian citizens. Nothing outrages me more than reading newspapers that voice concerns about Canadians who have fled abroad to fight for radicalized Islamic forces, and are free to return to Canada without having to face any kind of prosecution. What is the government doing?
1) Minimize government and stay out of private citizens lives.    2) Freedom and minimizing taxes.  Let individuals decide how to spend their incomes.    3) Safe and secure borders.  Protect our civil liberties and seek to preserve and defend Canadian culture not destroy it by not having people enter our country that do not share our values.
Serious and meaningful engagement on the world stage through international development beyond just security (which is an important issue). Contribution to global health, particularly women and children's health within the Sustainable Development Goals framework is very important. So is doing so through engagement with Canadian civil society.
Another important aspect is that we want a Government that treats its Public Service with respect and calls upon them immediately to complete the projects at hand. With that, we want to be compensated timely and fairly. We DO NOT want a Government that mistreats its Public Service through outsourcing, job insecurity, and poor compensation.
Canadian poverty reduction with the focus to meet the needs to address the social determinants of health.  I firmly believe this happens when we focus on our children and developing efficient programs that are well funded to meet the clearly increasing needs.  Healthy children become healthy, productive and accountable adults - our future.
Important aspects of open government that drive my interest are increasing responsiveness of government to Canadian Citizen concerns regarding:   1. foreign influence on government officials  2. foreign ownership of Canadian property  3. foreign ownership of Canadian business related to communications, environment, energy, and technology  
Morale values, rather than the flavor of the day and everyone has a right to do whatever they want.  Honorable, righteous government that looks at the long term effects.  Example why are we in such a rush to have access to drugs without taking the time to listen to the doctors and law enforcers all cautioning a more solid planned approach.
Odd that you seem to distinguish between government and the public, as a government employee, I consider myself both. Also I believe transparency should begin at home aka my work environment and lead by example; if the gov cannot be transparent for mere competition processes then I have little faith it can be transparent in anything other 
Revenue Canada information lines need to be easier to access and the information given needs to be correct.  The individual or business that gets wrong information is the one that pays the penalty, not the one giving the wrong information.  We call this information line under the impression this is the correct information we will receive. 
It sounds like there is an intersection with UN SDG goals? Perhaps there would be a benefit to align taxonomies? I believe Canada needs to report on SDG goals so alignment would be helpful? Is environment and health to broad doesn't SDG 7 and 13 ( the later being climate change) a big enough issue that it merits its own place on the list?
Economic growth means low interest rates to most Canadians.  The government should be able to not allow the Bank of Canada to raise interest rates at all.  In fact, they should be lower, we do not want to become like the USA, where hardworking citizens are losing their homes because of high interest rates.  It is stupidity to raise them.
I think negotiating the labyrinth of laws is quite difficult for a new immigrant. Some help from the govt regarding this aspect would be welcome.  The government also needs to be more open to change and embrace new technology, while not forgetting the human aspect of society. Canada`s humanist outlook needs to be maintained at all costs.
Reduction of government expenditure, costs, and unnecessary regulatory costs.  Reduction government deficit and promoting ``saving`` not ``spending`` culture.  New huge land use and natural resource use reform which will allow growing economic development of the whole North of a country starting from North Ontario and ending in Nunavut 
You had sixteen items listed as priorities, and limited choice to three...  so to add in...  Economic growth  Strong and independent democratic institutions  Innovation and knowledge based economy  Safe and secure Canada  Strong and mutually beneficial North American partnership  Prosperous Canada through global commerce.    Thanks.    
I have a concern that automation and the advancement of AI will drastically affect employment quality and availability. Are we preparing the next generation to deal with these challenges and are we as a society having meaningful discussions on what direction, outcomes those future decisions will make on the well being of all Canadians 
How important it is for Canadians to see results in a way that Canadians understand.   Publishing a report or "reporting" traditions may not be the most effective way to communicate with Canadians. In addition, if someone has to ask about what you did for them to know about what you did, then maybe it wasn't as effective as you think.
I care about international students who come here and struggle to get their permanent residency meanwhile other people are fast tracked through the system. These individuals have proven that they can be beneficial contributors to our society and we should be doing everything to help them get their status. They should be the priority. 
Freedom, in which free speech is valued and protected, particularly when individuals or groups express views that others may find offensive or distasteful--it is precisely these kinds of minority or unpopular views/speech that government needs to protect, irrespective of whether those views are considered "right wing" or "left wing."
I assume that this survey was meant to be at a Federal level and I think that there must be some inter-governmental consistency and communication; so that if I were to contact a service Canada representative, my City Councilor, a policeman/border security, my MLA and/or my MP, I would get relative, pertinent and correct information.
The previous question is a hard one to narrow down. When laid out like that, Canadian health, environment and diversity are high on my list, but in context with the rest of the survey, I also wanted to include and feel strongly about "Transparent, accountable and responsive Federal government", but I want this to lead to the others.
CRA needs to be more Canadianized. They seem to act above the law. Communication with individuals should not be a negative experience - innocent until proven guilty is our culture. CRA does not endorse this mode of operation or communication. Manners in government should be mandatory.  Most departments are courteous and respectful.
I think there should be restrictions on omnibus bills that are used to push through changes that would likely never make it on their own.  This undermines our democratic system and does not respect the principal of transparency, especially when negative/unpopular initiatives are buried deep behind more positive/popular initiatives.
1. Border Security - STOP/Use better enforcement to the flow of illegals coming in from the US;  2. Faster processing (hire more people) to get illegals properly vetted to remain and/or send out of Canada; and  3. Employment equity - Particularly accommodation, hiring practices, and discrimination of people with mental illnesses.
Having a cleaner open government presence - consolidate data holdings into single portals, instead of having different and completely independent portals for each and every thing.  Having a theme-based portal is ok, but make sure they get consolidated at some point in the data flow so users have easier time finding how to access.
Why do we continue to spend millions of dollars in making the federal government completely bilingual when the country only has about 30-35% French speaking citizens?  There is no need to increase the numbers and cost to this program. Especially when Anglophones in Quebec are not afforded the same courtesy of service in English.
-Not fucking people with OSAP loans makes me cringe when i hear that.( If a person is in a shitty situation, dont make them pay extra until they actually found a job with provided education, not some minimum wage job)  -Focusing on improving quality of life of Canadians  - Reducing taxes and other fees for low income families  
Policy decisions that would serve to bankrupt local economies should have a weighted vote in favor of the votes of those constituents in the affected economies before policies may be implemented (e.g. mining, logging, agriculture, energy, etc.)    Environmental policies must prove an economic viability before being implemented.
1. An OPEN gov't would allow all Canadians the freedom of speech: the infringement on freedom of speech has gotten out of control. The only opinions that are allowed to be spoken are those that fall in line with the ever-changing "standards" of special interest groups. An open government should uphold this right for everyone. 
I would like to see government decisions made,or heavily being based on, crowd-models of collective decision making.     Equally important -- electoral reform . We need a version of proportional representation. And a national conversation on what Canadians want,with good information to educate all of us on alternative models. 
Open communications around decisions being made to implement interdepartmental reorganizational restructuring that affects the work/services we need to provide Canadians/First Nations. Need to know what drove or led to the decision and a plan for actual implementation to minimize the chaos and unknown for Government employees.
Proactive disclosure lists are NOT user friendly, it is done in such a way as to just barely meet the minimal obligations of listing stuff publically, without being useful. They appear by short time frame, when month after month the same companies names appear. Make it sortable by year, or decade. Then trends would be obvious.
You know the old adage "it's the economy, stupid". That kind of thinking is no longer viable and borders on criminal. It should be clear by now to everyone that "it's the environment, stupid". Or if you prefer to really spell it out: The environment IS the economy. Without a healthy ecosystem there's no hope for anything else.
Public servants are not protected; the harassment and discrimination must look backwards because otherwise, the older employees will retire into poverty while those that harassed, bullied and discriminated against mostly the women English raised in Canada and minorities from Canada will suffer.  THE PS NEEDS TO BE A PRIORITY.
The Ethics and accountability of the Federal government (MPs and Senators in particular) needs an independent and thorough overhaul. No party can set the rules. An independent compliance and regulatory focused committee should be engaged to implement and oversee this process to restore faith of Canadians in their governments.
Canada could significantly improve its information sharing by redoing its website. It needs to embrace digital democracy. We should model the UK. Its GOV.UK site is a dream. Canada should also stop creating so many apps. Most of the time, a responsive site will deliver a better experience. The plethora of apps is expensive. 
I would like to be sure that government is making fact-based decisions. While I recognize there are nuances that shape how outcomes ultimately look, it concerns me when I see governments ignoring facts (science, especially) in order to achieve an agenda. We've gone a bit too far in hopes of appeasing activists in some areas.
Immigration - current government cares more about letting in just about anyone into the country than the citizens who were born and raised here.  We have homeless people everywhere and treat them like dirt but immigrants get everything handed to them  Enought!!!  Paying for terrorists is another issue - stop letting them in!
I want my government to take care of the MIDDLE CLASS AND THOSE WORKING HARD TO JOIN THEM" and stop giving my hard earned tax dollars away to everyone except a Canadian, veteran, or Senior!!!!! My money is not the government's piggy bank to abuse for their own self serving, unethical, agenda!!!!!! STOP WASTING MY MONEY!!!!!
Open government requires a strong and empowered public service.  It's vital that Canada reinvest in it's Public Service in order to improve accountability to Canadians.  Too many departments have cut so-called back-office jobs which would be the ones to provide the information and metrics needed for a truly open government.
Caregiver program made easier.  Keep the promise of no LMIA application fee.  It is very costly, difficult and challenging for those who need help. Program info difficult to find, criteria challenging, costly--more than hiring a Canadian who is unwilling to do the work if you can find anyone even qualified...which is rare.
Adequate pension for those that need it.  The working poor. I am 65 and they reduced my survivor pension.  Yet, I cannot support myself without working.  I don't know what will happen when I can't work.  My income almost qualifies for subsidy but not quite.  Then they take away funds earned by my deceased husband!  Why? 
An environment where multiple options and perspectives interact, collaborate and come to a decision on a way forward.  A Healthy Parliament, that is not narrowed by political correctness, but is made Open by respectful exchanges of views, none perfect, all improved by the opportunity to listen and learn from one another.
Government policies should not be driven primarily by economic concerns but by ideals that seek to better the lives of people everywhere through balance - environmental health, human health, sustainable technologies, forward thinking and healthy communities, and policies that foster mutual respect through responsibility.
OPEN WAYS TO GET PERMANENT RESIDENT AND CITIZEN FOR A INTERNATIONAL STUDENT, THEY SPENT A LOT MONEY HERE, THEY KNOW THE CANADA RULES, THEY COME HERE ACROSS A LONG PROCEDURES, THEY NEED TO SHOW TO CANADA INMIGRATION A LOT PAPERS TO COME HERE, AND IS TO HARD TO GET THE PERMANENT RESIDENCE THROW EXPRESS ENTRY....THANK YOU  
These surveys are a sham. You've wasted 5 minutes of my time. I hope that the key message here is that Canadian taxpayers have had it. We are fed up. We give you assholes 50% of our incomes and you turn around and give it to despots, terrorists, and useless people. I have never voted Liberal and I never will ever again. 
Canada needs to remain as an independent country, to protect our values , independence, and freedom. Free trade deals can be done on a business level,  as long as we have legal protection to protect the interest of Canadians and resources ( eg. Canadian Banks, I have some concerns here in borrowing from another Country)
I fully support a diverse society and social inclusion but I do not support linguistic duality in government operations due in part to the cost. We must continue to provide public services in as many languages as possible to serve the public.   The indigenous population of Canada deserves better recognition and support.
I see nothing for help with the mess of thousands of ''CANADIANS'' in federal institutions that have been wrongly convicted.Parole Boards included. Why are majority of inmates turned down on first time for parole? Don"t even go there about lack of funding when it seems there's lots of money for the rest of the world....
Provide a simple "government report card" at the end of every year that shows the key area's and how the current government has impacted these areas based upon the "platform" they put forward during the election period. Break it down and make it simple so the lay people of Canada can see what is happening across Canada.
It's important to me to not just have open dialogue, for dialogue's sake, but to have a good system in place for the experts to listen to and acquire useful information from the public to make decisions. I have great trust in the experts chosen to lead our country, but a good leader knows there is always more to learn.
Modernizing and improving Government HR practices. It no longer makes sense to ask, in an online job application, whether the individual is computer proficient. If we are not sure young people have these skills, they should be legislated to be mandatory through the school system. Please also fix the Phoneix pay system.
Canada needs to tighten up its spending. Be more frugal. Stop giving so much away on 'fun' activities and foreigners. I'm taxed and taxed and taxed so I personally have to have a tight budget to survive. Then I watch the Canadian government throwing money away on programs I don't view as beneficial. It's frustrating!
Im not sure if the last item that mentioned linguistic duality meant social inclusion for all minorities or was only speaking to language. I think that these are separate, distinct issues. One relates to the fundamental setup of Canada, and the other relates to changing populations and righting historical wrongs. 
Meaningful consultations - not just consulting for the sake of consulting or simply for the purpose of marketing a predetermined outcome; providing records of decisions back to individuals having been consulted - so they can understand why their feedback was not or could not be used and the basis of final decisions
Reduction and/or removal of party whips to ensure MP's (especially backbenchers) have more influence    Reduction and/or removal of corporate donations to political parties    Voting Reforms (ex. various forms of proportional representation)    Restructure Question Period so that the questions are actually answered
When the federal government ignores the spirit of supreme court judgments and writes new laws in violation of that spirit for the benefit of certain interest groups(which have serious issues of their own) is a problem that must be addressed. The pathetic dangerous prostitution and euthanasia decisions are examples.
Ensuring the future will not make the same mistakes time after time and to pay close attention to those in government abusing the system.  Learning from the destructive and horrific Phoenix failures by preventing further issues with other new systems rolling out.  Allowing true Canadians to be first in Canada. 
How much is the debt in $$$$$ how are we going to stop adding to and start to pay it off When is the gov. going to get spending under control? I do not want to leave a debt for my grandkids to have to pay off and I do not want interest rates to go to 10 to 15 % like it did in the 80's after the last big debt. 
Possibility of citizen voting on all important legislation being brought forward = direct democracy. Switzerland is one example; its citizens vote every 3 months, either in person or by mail, on all new issues being brought forward, by the state or by the people; as well as on all initiatives and referendums.
A sustainable economy. It's not about increased wealth and corporate profit that continues to exceed the world carrying capacity. Start the dialogue: growth does not equal prosperity. Without a healthy and thriving environment that sustainably supports us within reasonable measures our kid's kids are doomed!
Present policy seems an attempt to limit small business iniatives.  The current gov seems to believe that small business is comprised of tax cheats and fraudisters (their words) yet small business is Canada's biggest employer and is responsible for the most part for the greatest for the greatest job creation
Broken election promises . NULLIFY ELECTION RESULTS IF PROMISED POLICIES ARE IGNORED. For the 64years I have been in CANADA that has been the Liberal method : promise policies from the LEFT and then bring in the corporate gangsters to PLUNDER us mercilessly . Only Liberal Minority Governments benefit me !!!
I'd like to see the federal government take leadership on accessibility, security & sustainability. I'd like to see the approach that they take be systemic so that it is easier for others to have accessible, secure & performant systems. I do think collaborating with open source communities is key to this!
It would be nice to have more input into government.  We pay taxes and in return we would like to see our money used wisely.  At the moment it seems the government is like a runaway train with our finances.  Would it be too much to ask that our money is put to use in Canada for Canadians and spent wisely?
remember the basics  -functional search engine on website  -public information (not just plain language, but also information our partners need to fulfill their obligations --better horizontal management of shared responsibilities.  -engagement is two way communication between mutually interested parties.
The most prosper countries in the world are very focused on knowledge-based technology industries: South Korea, Taiwan, Sweden, Japan among others. In my opinion, trying to save blue collar jobs today is comparable to trying to save horse riding jobs a hundred years ago at the gates of the automobile age.
As citizens, we elect the government to represent us, therefore, we should be able to follow up government's plans and agenda.  I would like open government to develop a system incluiding all the government agenda on all different issues, which every canadian can access, follow up and give their opinion.
Is it possible to create an online based SIN registered polling website to feel for Canadians inputs on most major topics.    Also I am highly disappointed that I did not see anything about indigenous peoples on here.  We made the mess.  We need to empower them to help themselves.  Not impose or enforce.
1) A government that looks after traditional government roles such as trade, national security, and infrastructure.  2) A government that enables individual freedom and does not attempt to become a nanny through detailed policies aimed at driving personal behavior to achieve a politician's moral ideals.
I feel that it is vital that the government ensure universal access to education. No exceptions. I understand this is not the sole jurisdiction of the federal government, but its influence could promote  a system in Canada that would improve all the previous outcomes and create an asset for our future.
Participation of and contribution from a larger and more diverse group of citizens is an asset to governing we must not underestimate. As an average citizen, I need to know that someone is truly interested in my feedback. It is the only way to feel as a partner in this awesome journey we call Canada.  
Our armed forces working in a strong domestic roll such as the Coast Guard using planes and ships built in Canada .  Plus , all new Canadians except our values when becoming members of our country to the point of giving up their former passports while at the same time having their beliefs protected .
Put people to work saving the environment. There is not end to what needs to be done there. Offer increased social assistance for people willing to pitch in. Without sustainable environment, none of the other stuff you are talking about matter. Put the health of the planet and its inhabitants first. 
As a result of one of the 2015 election promises, consultations were held regarding proportional representation but other than being told that the pursuit will be dropped, there was no communication as to the detailed results of the various consultations and as to why that promise would not be held.
Investment in Service Design Innovation Software for Canadians and redesign experience of physical government service locations. Reduce wait time, churn, reduce bureaucracy, reduce Illegal activity, reduce government workers doing mundane tasks, invest in proper software experiences for Canadians.
Perhaps the most important Government responsibility after ensuring the safety of Canadians is effective management of the national economy which is missing from your list. Economic growth is one aspect of that responsibility but so too is management and control of the ever growing national debt.
The Frederic government process of application, discovery and result not only in immigration, but also the hiring of staff for themselves, seems a little archaic. The decision making takes so long, that it would seem the best people move on to other things and the existing staff are overwhelmed. 
We need to stop taxing everyone so we can waste our money on all the garbage that the liberals have been wasting it on. We work hard for our money and to find out that $20 million went to Hilary Clinton's foundation. We have enough happening in our own country. Take care of the tax payers first. 
Govt needs to implicit  programs on a daily basis continuously to eradicate  implicit bias ,and the need to respect each other, as more and more Canada is becoming a nation of people with diversified conditioning coming from all parts of the world to settle in this wonderful land of hospitality.
Having a government that is accountable to provide good value for my tax dollars.  I see so much waste and pork barrel projects when there is so much we could do if our government spent our money carefully and responsibly.  Thanks you for this simple way to provide my feedback to our government.
I believe that ALL Immigrants who WANT to come to Canada need to wan to be CANAIAN! Keep there believes but respect and take part in there new countries and dont stop  us from being Canadian! There was a reason they wanted to come here why WE love our country ! Protect Canada, and our heridige!
Open government means, among many other things, that all government spending is very clear. It should disclose as much detail as is practical, including salaries of all employees in all departments. The employers (the public) should know what they are paying for and what they are getting for it.
Our train system kills so many beings, it needs to be modernized, our water systems have become out dated, our septic systems out dated, these upgrades should be coupled with alternative energy  to get the job done, and provide jobs through out the country. Example" Watch Islands of The Future."
To my earlier point, I find it absolutely appalling that in a country like Canada, we permit compulsory wage deductions which are used to ensure the survival of compulsory wage deductions by hijacking elections and destroying the democratic process.  Why is organized crime legal in this country?
I would just like to say that I do the 20/20 surveys and I always state that we need get a hold on STUDENT DEBT in our country.  My daughter will finish in a year and a half with a debt of $100,000 and I live on a pension.  I help her as much as I can but with a fixed income, it is not so easy.
Permanent and quality communication with the citizens of Canada (ministerial correspondence in a niche not used enough in the improvement process) . Government recognition that the citizens are the ones who pay the Government to lead and serve citizens in an honest, efficient, and helpful way. 
In regards to govt asking for my input or views or decisions being made, I personally don't feel that I have ever been involved before a decision has already been made. It would be nice to have more opportunities and easy access to participate in referendums/surveys/data collection processes.
Yes - I want smaller government ; less regulation and red tape ; less taxes at all levels ; less government tax benefits ; the ability for the private sector to do what needs to be done.  Government does not need to be in the business of solving anything - they just need to get out of the way
Of the 16 priorities listed on the previous question, it was difficult to select only three. Others are equally important to me, including: well-managed and efficient government operations (to reduce costs), employment and income security, transparent, accountable and responsive government. 
Making decisions about allowing ISIS fighters to remain in Canada unimpeded or unpunished without the voice of Canadians needs to stop.  Bringing in refugees because it is a media opportunity (Syrians) instead of looking at all the refugee issues (Ethiopians in Kenya, for example) is wrong.
As we hear from many different sources what is going on in the Government world, it would be nice to have a way that allows individuals to see for themselves, what decisions are being made and why, while the government being open to hearing and listening to other Canadian's point of views.
Overhaul of Canadian tax system to simplify and to treat all Canadians equally (i.e. stop providing tax benefits to couples that singles can't access since singles already bear a higher load on their income as they don't benefit from economies of scale that couples/families benefit from).
The previous questions are terrible and they are asking people to select things that they have no idea about. Whose bright idea was this. The questions are also confusing and I think that asking people to give 3 answers per question is even more complex. Not happy with this waste of time.
either fix phoenix or junk it and start over. don't use the same management that mismanaged this whole affair. and listen to compensation, finance, and human resources people who work in the trenchesnot the usual top down stupidity. those three departments don't interact well or at all.
I feel like some of the questions that were limited to 3 options had multiple options that were similar enough that it was difficult to really distinguish what my 3 choices were. I fear this survey may have been designed to get a desired response by needlessly creating internal conflict.
My biggest issue or want is that when a government is elected on certain platforms, live up to the promise.  More and more governments are making and breaking the goals and attributes in which they got elected, which intern makes it difficult to trust that they will do what they say.    
Real citizen engagement through Transparent Official Site providing pertinent informations and feedback on topics of interest. Possibility through circles to discuss these topics and make contributions (ideas, informations, donations, work, ...) to make life better.. @the speed of Light!
1- BETTER WAY TO VOTE FOR MY REPRESENTATORS (PM and MEMBER OF PARLIMENT). WHY CAN I NOT VOTE FOR THE HEAD OF GOVERNMENT SEPARATELY?  2- THE SENATE IS NO LONGER REQUIRED. NOW IT IS JUST A HUGE EXPENSE THAT IS NO LONGER RELEVANT AND IS NOT ACCOUNTABLE TO CANADIANS AS THEY ARE NOT ELECTED.
All elected officials should respond to correspondence in a timely and efficient manner. I wrote to the PM by email with a copy by post and never heard back. I know there's a lot of correspondence but, at least official letters by mail should be responded to within a few months. Thanks!
Healthy Canadians - we need to look at increasing the efficiency of our health care system from a national level - physicians are currently the budget gatekeepers (recommend thrapies,procedures etc).  More public health and preventative measures- which meshes with healthy environments.
We need to take care of the Canadian people who really need help and stop all the other handouts that do not really need it and find any excuse not to work. If they can not work or take care of themselves there should be a home for them to learn to grow food and take care of themselves.
Elected officials who are involved in any unethical/illegal activity should be expelled from their position immediately and lose all benefits. You should not be allowed, for example, to profit from your position/conflict of interest and still be allowed to collect a government pension.
I think that a focus on an innovation and knowledge based economy would go along way to providing income security to many Canadians. I also think that working to eliminate global poverty and inequality (home and abroad) will automatically make the whole world safer and more peaceful. 
We are in desperate need of a smart government that is financially responsible and takes care of Canada before donating borrowed money. A government that is not creating racial diversity by giving other certain races money in hopes of buying forgiveness, hand outs do not help anyone. 
Government officials should not be allowed to accept contributions for elections that so obviously influence them into allowing our citizens to be drugged by big pharma and poisoned by big agriculture and big corp. It's insanity! We must cut the ties from regulators and industry now.
I believe that the strengthening of local micro economies is strategic and interdependent with greater macroeconomic issues. Only by bolstering local socioeconomic relationships will national economies thrive in the advent of a competitive, and at times concentrating, global economy.
I really want to be able to get data, facts figures on the key areas of government easily.  What programs are suitable to me, how much money is available for certain initiatives or types of people, basic foundation numbers too (population, demographics, funding per capita on things).
Phoenix. As a government employee my pay is in jeopardy every time there is any change on my paycheck. When there is an error it is always to the employees detriment. We shouldn't have to calculate every pay change then submit PARs that take months, or even years, to correct in pay.
The promotion of core values (acceptance of all, value of hard work, importance of knowledge) with emphasis on Education programs for our children.  A healthy, prosperous society by nurturing our youth and eliminating ignorance will naturally improve Canada as a whole in the future.
Gouv having ability to change course if needed (ex: election change promise that was correctly dropped or environment issues)  Fed gouv keeping out of provincial jurisdictions or regional values (ex: mind your business on Qc niqab issue as regional values can differ across Canada)
I am  Metes. I am not an Indian, do not throw  metis and Indian together. My grandmother was thrown off the reserve with all the clothes she could carry when she met my grandfather. Metis are a mixed breed and we don't fall under either group so please don't lump us all together. 
I am extremely concerned about all these people just walking across our bordered & the govt welcoming them with open arms! Why is the govt not taking care of Canadians first. The homeless, veterans , people out or work. Our heath care needs more work. Waiting times are Ridiculous.
Get your computer systems fixed.  I have been having issues repeatedly with CRA. Phone the issues in but are not getting resolved. And everybody reads about other system issues that are not getting resolved. For the good of the country this is unacceptable! GET THE SOFTWARE FIXED
Government officials being actually accountable. When asked a direct question, the response SHALL be direct also. No one trusts this government because no one answers the questions asked, and there is NO accountability. This is the reason why voter turnout is at an all-time low.
Less immigration from certain places that do not support Canadian culture and values to avoid home grown terrorism; improved "free" health care - just lost a loved one due to very poor hospital services; don't give money to immigrants when there are Canadians that need more help
Lowering taxes by improving government spending and lessening the waste. Every time you turn around the government wants more money leaving less for Canadians. CRA explaining why they say you owe more money after they reassess you taxes, even though they were completed by a CPA.
odsp amounts    they should be a lhit is not there fault they cannot work   because of health reasons also rentals  should not be that high  because people on odsp cannot pay what they are asking   if they pay it it takes it out of there  food   and which is hard to survive then
Respect and giving back to the first people of this land and preserving the world around us.  #1 focus should be on the sharing of information and us as a nation working together on making Canada and the world a sustainable Earth for ours future generations of all living things.
The Canada government has to make its presence felt in the International stage .It has to be proactive in getting partnerships in place, in order to assist businesses and organizations. The government has to be aware there is the  European, African and Asian markets out there . 
transparency and resolving issues such as workplace discrimination.  i.e. multiple recent findings involving RCMP discrimination against female employees with families or disabilities.  TB must take an active role where the department appears to condone workplace discrimination.
In regard to the government my thinking is simple.  When I voted you in I took the time to hear what you said and found that you would be that candidate who would follow my ideology.  I now leave it to you.  You are paid to do this, if you mess up I will vote you out next time.
Reduce debt burden on Canadians. A significant amount of money is paid to service the debt that could be used to run programs or lessen the tax burden.  Governments/Parties do not appear brave enough to start on the long pathway nor stay on this pathway when they come to power.
The idea of a self sustained country is not impossible, building green houses to grow food that we normally cannot with our climate changes would also increase jobs and take away the immediate threat of not having a plentiful food supply .. should be on the table .. just saying
Getting a guarantee that all correspondence ( either by Canada Post or email ) is responded to in a reasonable time eg 30 working day.    It takes months  and sometimes years sometimes to elicit a response from organizations such as Citizenship Canada, CRA, Passport Office etc
Government transparency is about being compelled to report on unpopular choices and mistakes and errors. Part of making this possible is fostering an environment where we recognize that mistakes are made - and we are transparent in our efforts to learn and correct our actions.
Providing clear information explaining government processes and decisions to average Canadians; Showing Canadians how the government is working for them towards a better Canada; Easily accessible information on the day-to-day decisions that are made which affect all Canadians.
1. I think that openness and transparency are very important but would not want to have so much openness that it would compromise national security and the safety of Canadians.   2.Unbiased reporting of research results, even if they dont support the governments objectives. 
1. Safe and secure Canada   2. Healthy Canadians   3. Well managed and efficient government operations   4. Fair and secure workplace   5. Economic growth   6. Global poverty reduction through sustainable development   7. Safe and secure world through international engagement
I believe the overhaul of the Senate also to be important - reflecting on the last additions to Senate, these may have been a diverse group, however the majority came from educational institutions - a small section of Canadian society, and not as promised, ordinary Canadians.
I would love to know why a government employee who doesn't file their taxes for a couple of years gets fined over $20K while rich folks are keeping their money in offshore tax schemes and when they get caught, they get "forgiven" like the KPMG scandal. Thanks for nothing CRA!
Ist Nations should be accountable for funding and should have to be transparent to the Canadian Taxpayers.They should not be tax free. Who will pay for them in the future,when they become the majority of the population.This is double standard and very unfair to the taxpayers.
It is important that politicians adhere to high ethical standards and are arm's length from any personal benefit accruing from their actions. When politicians have a conflict of interest, they should recuse themselves, else ordinary citizens will consider them to be corrupt. 
Currently my priority for the Federal Government is that the Phoenix situation and all outstanding pay issues are resolved. That the current government do more than they are doing; That they take responsibility for the horrific mess this has created for the public servants. 
Pay is a priority to ensure well-being in the workplace, ensuring transparency and accountability for collective agreements and labour laws. Recourse mechanisms for employees are not in place and should be equitable for all Canadians in the Public Service and Private Sector.
Proportional representation is key to accountable government. Transparency of government is inconsistent with a non-representative system such as first past the post where vested interest have a disproportionate influence on policy, since this undue influence must be hidden.
To be honest I am part of the Canadian Payroll Association (CPA) and I love the fact that you listen to them and help us payroll professionals.  I have nothing bad to say about our government as I feel you listen to my needs through the CPA!  So please keep up the great work
Being a voice for the voiceless,   Improve and empowering young refugees financially giving a chance resettling them through student refugee program  to restart their study and work to make great Canada again with those displaced and helpless  young refugee internationally!
I want to see people involved in government, instead of all the online bashing that goes on.    I want the real news upfront so we don't have fake news to deal with  I want government to meet the trolls directly (in person/online) and dispel the ugly and hateful messaging. 
I would like to see information in accessible, easy to find and read formats. We spend too much time searching for information on government websites. Then we find it what it is we are looking for, it is in an unwieldy format or doesn't contain all the information needed. 
The interchangeable use of  information and knowledge can be confusing if it is not made clear that knowledge  is being used in a new and unusual sense, and can seem unscrupulous insofar as the  intent is to attach the prestige of knowledge to mere information. Take note!
I am interested in the Consultations Directory and the inclusion of a results section - i.e. what was the outcome of the consultation. For the most part the Directory is fine for input but there is little in the way of reporting results. That very much needs to be added.
I think we need to do more to protect the environment and support native cultures and their land.  I think we should let the natives have a voice in parliament and a seat in the government in order for decisions to made fairly, and benefit all social groups and cultures.
Increased campaigns and efforts to engage the common public (e.g., through dissemination of relevant information, advertisements that also educate), especially those in their 30s and 20s to actively participate in government initiatives and the functioning of democracy. 
Open government seems like a good thing, but please be careful to respect the fact that there are legitimate cases in which security considerations and/or the proper functioning of the government decision-making process need to trump the public's so-called right-to-know.
It would be nice for the people and the government to have a channel of communication, going forward, new ideas can be brought to the table. For example, having more survey's , professional advice, given out on a periodic basis, towards issues that need to be resolved. 
You really, really need to fix your Phoenix payroll system.  My friend works for CRA and hasn't been paid since May.  Nobody seems to know about this Phoenix payroll debacle.  If they did, I am sure they would be outraged.  You need to pay the people that work for you. 
1.A common sense approach on the development of Canada's resources  2.Reduce Canada's support of other energy producing nations,   3.Canada needs to maximize the development of our resource industry while those resources are in demand.   It may be already be too late 
I would like a vehicle by which I can quickly tell the government when I disagree with a decision that they have made. Although they are the elected party, it does not mean that the majority of Canadians agree with them. Perhaps and online forum open to all Canadians.
Reduce the centralization of power and governmental functioning in the Prime Minister's Office.    Respect and respond more fully to government's own audit functions, such as reports from the Privacy Commissioner, the Environment Commissioner and the Auditor General
There should be more accountability among federal govt employees (senior management) and ministers.  There should also be consequences for those above. To have real and effective consequences due to bad behaviour, conflict of interests and mismanagement by the govt.
I didn't see much on justice. I would like to see the Canadian government establish laws that will allow fair justice to everybody and protect those who need it the most. This way, vulnerable citizens (women for example) will not continue to be victims of crimes.  
Again, immigration. As an IT headhunter, Canada is extremely short of quality IT talent. I am not convinced that the current selection schemes truly identify the talent. I receive many applicants who have Express Entry but do not pass my resume screens/interviews.
Open government strives to address the needs of all classes of Canadians. Help the poor and elderly to be secure, independent and fruitful, help the middle class be secure, independent and fruitful and help the business class be secure, accountable, and fruitful. 
I want Canada to use some of the innovative and sustainable ideas that are already being used in other countries. As well as improve the management of waste and other harmful activities. This would improve the lives of so many and provide a healthier environment.
Canadian youth are going to be cleaning up and living in the mess we have made. This is wrong - we need to address climate crisis, lobby hard to prevent war overseas (cause of the massive refugee exodus) and end the enslavement of young people to student loans. 
Having ALL government workplaces represent the Canadian population - including people with disabilities.  To make better use of the employable population to the best of our abilities, through better research (WFA), engagement and understanding of all barriers.  
1.  Employment, healthcare, and housing for people with disabilities.  2.  Canadians first when it comes to employment, social assistance, healthcare, and housing.  It is not fair to them when new immigrants and refugees get immediate and often more assistance.
Please know that I do not expect clean environment to fall of the agenda. I now think the work is starting on this, so that others can be moved to the front, but I do not want this to fall off as something important that we need to act on and share with others.
1. Create a federal job guarantee (i.e. living wage job provided for all Canadians who want one)  2. End scaremongering about government debt and deficits  3. Establish a new civil protection organisation patterned on the German Technisches Hilfswerk (THW)    
1. Tax relief to middle class families  2. Accountability for government spending.  The government should focus spending first on Canadians & fundamental services before spending on other things.  3. Protection of rights & freedoms such as freedom of religion.
A stronger military, both through size but modernized equipment. It is disgraceful that we bought second hand submarines that would catch fire. We either need to buy QUALITY equipment for our troops or develop our own, not any of this used second hand garbage.
Everything is centralized around the big over populated cities which takes workers from smaller cities .Plan and encourage jobs into smaller cities. People will go where the jobs are. This in turn will increase our employment, real estate and feed to new jobs.
Federal Departments with major expenditures should report the benefit/loss to Canadians associated with those expenditures: infrastructure, social spending, education, health care, etc. You'll be rewarded for finding bargains, and punished for wasting money.  
Reopen CRA offices to public immediately. Trying to call them is not working. Furthermore they are hard on poor and middle class but let the rich get away with everything including our Finance Minister. So a more accountable and open CRA would be a great start
I would like to see the government more aware of the abuses on the TFWP, those workers are in many cases abused, living in awful conditions with fear, they are a very important part of our economy, their work in Canada should be more appreciated by all of us.
lessening income inequality; creating a national housing strategy to tackle homelessness, the precariously housed and create / support affordable housing now. This is more important to me than several of the items on the previous list (including my choices). 
Preserving natural wealth - afforestation was missing. Most green cover in developing and developed nations are lost because governments forget to focus on environmental impact of deforestation. For every tree logged - 200 or more saplings need to be planted.
The government should NOT be able to send money to other countries without our say and put us into the horrifying debt that we are in right now.  The government should not be able to pay our tax dollars in the millions to convicted terrorists without our say.
FIX PHOENIX. This country will crumble if all of us take the federal government's own advise to tax payers to stop working when pay is disrupted. This is DISGUSTING and something I expect to read about the civil service infrastructure in developing nations. 
Free post-secondary education and fully funded public healthcare when I say full healthcare I mean including dental care, eye care, prescription drugs etc. Free universal daycare. These are all things that would actually improve the economy and not hurt it. 
Listen to citizens especially on issues in their area, when government proposes a plan that many people disapprove of, work with the people as much as possible to make changes that will accommodate the areas that were causing a disapproval for the citizens. 
I reflect on the poorly handled consultations on electoral reform that cost much in actual money spent and cost a great deal of lost credibility on the part of the government. My point is that being "honest" and ethical along with transparent is essential. 
Right now, one of the most important parts of a canadian government is consultation with indigenous people, respect for indigenous rights, treaties, and land, and successful collaboration with all indigenous governments on key economic and cultural issues. 
- Simplifying the tax code in a manner that is based on fairness, not forced equality or revenue generation  - Providing stimulus for Canadians to generate economic growth instead of stifling it through punitive tax programs and politically driven policies
economic prosperity without negative environmental impact,  environmental and economic impact assessment with all energy sectors that looks to avoid further escalation of global warming,  global leadership in development and implementation of green energy 
Inclusiveness and diversity means more than favouring those from ethnic minorities, it also means no discrimination against, for example, white European stock. It is important that the federal government not replace one form of discrimination with another.
"Without prejudice" access to government personal to know problems/issues are actually being worked on particularly CRA. CRA asks for 30 day turnaround on tax information and then you never hear from them again. Set a forty-five day response time for CRA.
Embrace new engagement mechanisms like pol.is for consultations and release that data in realtime as it comes in. Also do the same for government procured survey data from polling. Because I don't trust the results aren't being spun for political favour. 
Financially stable government  Improved F/PT relationships to decrease duplication of work and thereby improve appropriate spending habits of all  Strong, knowledgeable and contextually competent leadership in federal government - not political appointees
I believe we should have full access to details regarding lobbyists and where the money that influences our regulations is actually coming from. Allowing corporations to shape our future with only their own interests in mind is the worst kind of foolish.
Make it easier for Immigrant specially new-comers to start working in their profession in first 3 month of coming to Canada(It is surprising that any career owner needs Canadian experience once on the arrival),and Provide robust occupational safety laws.
We are a wealthy nation in resources, people, diversity, yet we can't solve our own poverty issues, education access issues...and more.  I'd like to see the federal government focus on making Canada stronger by investing in the population it already has.
I would like to see social programs revised to be accessible and accountable to everyone.  I love to be helping other countries, but we have major issues in Canada that require assistance first such as health care, employment and strong economic growth.
1. Many of these are important-it was often difficult to choose the top three.  2. NAtional Government Pre-emption of local laws especially where Inter-provincial and inter North America Trade is involved including a workable and fair NAFTA agreement  
Please know there are a lot of seniors and others on fixed incomes who cannot afford to properly heat their houses and have to live cold in the winter because of the high prices of electricity and other fuels.  Some have to stay under blankets all day.
Find a way to help those that slaughter animals for a living, for their fur, to make a living a different less destructive way. Phase out the fur industry in a positive approach that does not leave those dependent on it without a way to make a living.
Open government must be framed to encourage a more participatory democracy where the public (private citizens, orgs, private sector business, etc.) becomes more understanding of how government works for them and more engaged in helping it work better.
government should see how international visa offices are working on commitment as of now spousal open work permit program for international students from india are getting delayed more than normal process. which is not good for international students
Priority One - Entrepreneurs acceleration locally & globally   Priority Two - Fraud examination and management as an integrated national unit   Priority Three - Information Technology policies (IT is the upcoming evolution and needs to be controlled)
Would like to know more about government spending than just what the government wants us to know.  Would like to see more honesty in government especially in answering questions in the house.  Stop skirting around the tough questions with BS answers.
to admit when there is an obvious obstruction to avoid accountability  Laws are man made taking advantage should not be  part of accepting corruption to any degree   Honesty and Integrity is paramount for this Country to be Strong and Successful.   
Overall, the questions are aimed at what the government can do to create an environment that allows for interaction.  The part that appears to be missing is the individual's citizen responsibility and accountability to act and work with government.
Staffing has become a rampant abuse of Mgnt power in the Fed Government. Accountability & openness in staffing processes (who is involved, each step of the process, details on decisions being made, etc) would go a long way to weeding out the abuse.
Why doesn't the federal government put its Public Service employees first? The issues with Phoenix are disgraceful to Canada! If you don't pay your employees in a timely and accurate manner, you're telling them they don't matter. Its about RESPECT.
A government cannot reflect Canadian values, when the opposition receives the majority of votes but receives the minority of seats in Parliament.     Electoral reform MUST take place, in spite of the Prime Minister's deceit to the Canadian public.
Genuine engagement on complex/wicked problems is what is needed most, but that demands different ways of policymaking and a different culture in/of government.  Change management and organizational learning.  Social learning and collective impact.
Members of Parliament consulting constituents through Direct Democracy. For example, non binding votes on issues through a secure constituency online voting system. Members could then present their constituents' views to their party and parliament
Set government policies that allow every citizen to benefit, not only the rich.  Protect our environment. Encourage more environmentally friendly infrastucture, like geothermal heating and solar power. Stop building dams that ruin the environment.
1.  Government that does not manipulate statistics to their own political interests and advantage; truth in government and that truth relayed to the public and media  2.  Affordable financial and health security for seniors and low income earners
fiscal accountability of gov't, over taxation, over spending, pitting different groups against each other (e.g. recent demonizing of small business owners as tax cheats), failure to hold PM and Finance minister to same standards as the non-elites
Health Canada should work with individual provinces so that the same medications get the same coverage across Canada. Right now, some medications are covered in one province while they are not covered in the rest of the provinces and territories.
I think we should try to provide services needed for people who are obese or overweight if they so choose to use them. I think that the services should be included in insurance and be kind of like how when I go to the doctor, I jus swipe my card.
Stats Can should be free for anyone with a valid SIN card ... raw data levels with no personal information.  Health Care Records, CRA, All Government Agencies (all levels) should be digitized with encryption levels that can handle 98% of hacks.  
using our own resources across the country instead of importing products that we are already producing.  Especially when areas of our economy are in a downturn and instead of supporting our internal businesses, we are supporting foreign economies
Health care - too many cuts have been made to health care. Canada is admired throughout the world for our health care system.  It needs to be funded properly.  Go ahead and raise my taxes, healthcare for all is something I am willing to pay for.
That Government stops throwing money around to just about anybody just to give itself good conscience and perhaps, have someone verify that this money really serves the initial purpose and does not go into someone's pocket, like it always does. 
Government made the decision to use GCMS system to modernize Canadian passport issuing system.  GCMS will never work - we need outside of government solution.  Why are millions of my tax $ being spent on a system that will perform like Phoenix?
Government must be accountable for public spending and budget management. All managers should be accountable openly and frequently for their spending of Canadian tax dollars so we get the best value and have more funding for important programs.
There should be more than 3 choices - Canadians should have priority in retaining jobs and be provided with training through our Canadians programs not newcomers or Visitors/Students on sturdy/ work permit - Immigration laws need to be changed.
Veteran's Affairs - either give us our life-long pensions back or explain why you can't. Stop the horrible red-tape and denials of claims for Veterans. FIX PHOENIX for God's sake! I've had my pay screwed up since it went live. Enough is enough.
you asshats told me the damn survey was AFTER my business here .....more govt bullshit...I am actually here seeking information and you make that search as difficult, complicated, and onerous....so much for your open transparent government bah!
federal government should provide advice, guidance and financial support for provincial level mandates such as health care and education. These are key Canadian values that are downloaded on the provinces...some of them are 'havenot provinces'
Usability and simplicity is THE most important aspect to any site I use. When a government is open but I can't find the information because the Government's main web site is confusing and redundant I give up on trying to find that information.
Wasting tax payers money (my money) on things that do not benefit the average Canadian.  Allowing people into our country, paying them an income, providing housing and making sure they are looked after before our own Canadians is a disgrace.  
It is important that national and personal security not trump citizens' rights to privacy and due process. These rights have been heavily eroded under both the previous and current governments, a trend that must not only end, but be reversed.
None of these issues should have been limited to 3 responses, they all should have been offered as a response option by priority.  Almost all described areas of issues are important, asking me to choose only 3 is neglectful and irresponsible.
To see a government that is visible on every letter . That government listens to all the people . We cannot fix the past all the time with money handouts. But we can make sure they don't happen again. And we need to take care of our seniors .
1)I felt you need to have more about cost containment and zero budget deficits. This is critical to our prosperity  2) The government approach would be better if it was a how do we achieve whether than why. Too much time is spent on the why.
Create a system where the people can vote on policies and the direction of this country. Canada has population of 40 million (opinions) but all the decision are based on 200-300 people that are influenced by Lobbyist and self serving greed. 
Being a veteran of 30 years , and having to fight with VA for 20 years to receive benefits for an injury  and the board was not ONE military experienced member . Its time to change VA with a responsible   and people who can relate to Vets .
My interests were definitely addressed in the previous questions. I just wanted to say it's nice to see that a government is finally not only open to the idea of transparent, but is actually taking actions to make it happen. wtg Canada! :) 
Private property rights enshrined in law.  A defense of habitation law or Castle Law that designates a person's abode or any legally occupied place  e.g., a vehicle or home  as a place in which that person has protections and immunities. 
Representatives in government should be able to place the voice of their constituents first and the ideals of the party last.   They need to remember that they are the only voice in government for both those who voted for and against them. 
A government that promotes fair practices and avoids favouritism and unfairness in hiring or promotions.  A fair govt would have a balanced approach to promotions like that of the army with testing every 3 years to determine actual level. 
-eliminate corruption  -hold people accountable in public office  -keep our country safe  -get the economy moving  -Canadians come first.  Help our people, our economy, our vets, our homeless, our sick... then we can worry about others.  
I had made a request of the Library of Parliament to get a copy of the Guaranteed Income Supplement Act and was told they didn't have it available.  I ended up getting it from the Library of Congress of the USA!  What else can I tell you?
I have doubts that our government is democratic if its citizens have no say in its functioning. Also whenever things go sideways like the Phoenix fiasco nobody seems to be held accountable and there are no consequences or lessons learned.
Seniors need help to get dental and physio services covered under OHIP. And the cost of eye glasses and hearing aids. I'm sure many people don't get their hearing tested because of the cost of hearing aids.Additional tax cuts for seniors.
This is a horrible survey, instead things should be allowed to be more than three, and at least offering ranking. Obviously the government continues to use old techniques in a world of big data and machine learning. This is sad, pathetic.
cpp formula to calculate amount given to each canadians should have the amount of hours worked in consideration more than the amount of $ in revenue in the formula since most canadians work for minimum wage and rents go higher than ever.
Ensure that when issues are raised through open government means, that the government has the ability to enact simple fixes in a rapid fashion. I (citizens) don't care what department is dropping the ball, put your house in order please.
Ensuring balance between canadian citizens privacy and security and government's ability to pursue criminals such as tax avoiders, potential terrorists, etc.  Protecting human rights e.g. allowing religious freedom but banning polygamy. 
Ensuring open government concept moves away from a marketing perspective (one way only communication more interested in defending or promoting government) to a more inclusive, meaningful and dynamic exchange on issues of public interest)
Government should apply the full set of policy and program tools to data and related technologies starting with a distinct ministerial mandate. Just as with other societal assets and needs. Government data would be a subset within this. 
I would like to hear a direct answer when a question is asked, even if the answer is unpleasant. I believe it shouldn't be about making the person who asked the question happen as much as it's about doing the right thing for our country.
we want the non canadians , the illegals, can not vote for PM. they are NOT canadians and are clueless to our values. we want trudeau held accountable for rapes and robberies and deaths or the canadians. we want him tried for treason NOW
Repeating myself here, it looks like this government, and most before it, routinely hold public consultations but don't appear to actually respond to the input received and just go off and do what is expedient for them to stay in power.
Bureaucratic overburden is currently overwhelming, eliminating French as an official language would have a huge benefit to government operations. We need to develop a reasonable Qubcoise separation plan that protects loyal Canadians.
AVOIDING INEFFICIENT, WASTEFUL USE OF MONEY BY DEPTS AND AGENCIES IN SPURIOUS PROGRAMS    ENSURING MONEY IS NOT BEING SPENT WASTEFULLY ON SOCIAL PROGRAMS    ENSURING QUALIFIED BENEFICIRIES OF SOCIAL PROGRAMS DO OT ABUSE THE PROGRAMS  
The length of time it takes to receive a decision on EI and other government services. I've been waiting over a month for a decision on my EI and have no update on whats going on. People have bills to pay and families to take care of.
A lot of times, the data that can be found on gov websites is chunked. What I would need to do decent analyses is individuals' results, even if that happens to come at the cost of certain informations to cover the need for anonymity.
Caring for our North and it peoples. I work in the arctic and feel that as Canadians the Inuit do not have equality in quality of life for all Canadians. This of the basics such as housing, food security and education as 3 priorities
Hire the necessary man power and provide the proper education/training to the individuals representing the CRA. Cease the preassumed instalment tax due March 15, and the penalty interest, due 1.5 months prior to Federal tax deadline.
I think it is not transparent to require all managers and supervisors to speak CBC level for French.  This eliminates 90% of Canadian.  It results in a weak public service full of those that cannot do the work, but can speak French!!
I think we should have more say on who the government pledges funds to when we have so many Canadians out of work and living on the streets that could benefit from those funds.  I think we need to take care of our own people first.  
Senior government management at the DM, ADM, and in treasury board should interact and share information with federal employees and the public, to avoid issues such as those caused by Phoenix, Public Works and Shared Services Canada.
Stop playing politics. Give the facts, minus the 'spin'. Also, not everything the opposing political parties do is a catastrophe - stop treating it as such. It only serves to weaken peoples' belief in the effectiveness of government.
Equal access to information and opportunity (net neutrality, high speed internet in remote/rural areas, etc. ...)  Meaningful reconciliation with First Nations  Value communities over resource-based industry in rural/remote areas  
Fair & secure workplace, Well managed and efficient government operations, Safe & secure world through international engagement, Transparent, accountable and responsive Federal government and Innovation and knowledge based economy.
Looking forward to hearing from another prospective, share and immediately implement the voice of youth group, search for the upcoming leaders to keep the country safe and secure based on their upcoming vision and future studying. 
More $ are needed for health care, access to pharmaceuticals and high quality long term care for seniors at home and in facilities.  Health care in Canada should be consistent for all Canadians across all provinces and territories.
Being able to get direct, honest and factual responses in an timely manner to questions asked and respected for asking - not frowned at or given a run about - no direct answer because the government rep is too politically correct.
Fiscal responsibility.  Quality regulation and free-market policies.  freedom of association and rational labor laws.  Freedom for Canadians and immigrants to enter into a work contract with reasonable rules and not protectionism.
It seems that in order to appeal to some special interest groups, that their is a subtle persecution of conservative Christians, because the present government can't relate to them or interact with them, without using caricatures.
RENEWABLE ENERGY.  AN END TO ANIMAL AGRICULTURE.  BASIC INCOME.  ERADICATE HOMELESSNESS: GIVE EVERYONE A HOME.  TAKE LESS, GIVE MORE BACK TO THE WORKING CLASS.  MINIMUM WAGE x3 + FULL BENEFITS.   WORLD PEACE.    THANKS FOR ASKING!
Going back to first principles of Government. Employment for all, Health Care for all, National Security for Canadians. Special Interest groups representing a small number of Canadians should not be a priority to the Government. 
Citizens should have a parallel voting mechanism that is open and easily accessible, so analytics can be published and discussed on how government's actions and decisions are diverging or aligning with current citizen sentiment.
That was good.  As a suggestion only 3 choices to choose from the list especially from the last 16 items were few, I needed to mark more.   Safer and more advanced and easier style of living especially for more vulnerable people
The public should be involved in debates surrounding the moral sentiments and philosophical stances behind certain pieces of legislation. This way, the government has more than just slogans and buzz-phrases to be accountable to.
Although I said that citizen participation is not important to me, I do believe it is an important priority in general and think the government needs to continue and improve upon its engagement strategy to listen to the people.
Expenditures should reflect the wishes of the majority of Canadians - not elected egos!  Control Government spending to bring deficit down - needs not wants!  Work for good of Canadians before all other countries/commitments.  
The astonishing corruption in Canadian government needs to addressed through prison sentences for senators, prime ministers and MPS when they are convicted of corrupt practices, for example Morneau should be charged and jailed!
The youth have a voice but no one listens to them, hence the results in the later years .  They need programs in schools for Ie: machine work, mechanic, audio/visual lets get industry leaders to invest in local school programs 
Transparencies in the way government makes decisions on what they choose to do or not to do is key so that citizens are not left in the dark wondering how such decisions are made or why. We need know why that decision was made.
employment is a huge issue in NS , over educated and underemployed is a term used to describe myself and many other people i know. Then compound that with student debt and you have what you call our current economic problem . 
http://www.ontariocourts.ca/scj/clerkship/summer/  The duties of the summer students will primarily consist of providing legal research support to the Office of the Chief Justice, as well as some administrative support duties.
In my opinion the CBC is a crucial and democratic tool for Canadians, it is not governed by private interest but by public interest. Please stop the management installed by the previous administration from gutting it further!!
to be honest, I feel that electoral system reform would make a difference in my engagement level and the feeling of an open government (even though the election would determine the government rather than improve its openness) 
We need to stop living in the past and create separation by granting some people rights that others don't have. Like children you can't give candy to one without the other getting angry and despising the one who got the candy.
1) Simplify and improve the insanely complex income tax process for every taxpayer   2) we need a process for Canadians to have a chance to improve the government, i.e. have a process to change the laws via our voting process
1. Close loopholes used by tax evaders -- including those who misappropriate grants and contribution funds -- and prosecute, punish and convict them.  2. Tangibly demonstrate improved aboriginal health and education outcomes.
Don't allow oligopolies to control and impede progress, for example Bell Canada, Rogers control access to internet; and the big Canadian banks prevent fintech from providing cheaper and valuable services to people in Canada. 
Providing more security for lower income Canadians including the working poor. Promoting public transportation and reducing car dependency, shifting the tax code to support renters and not people rich enough to be home owners
1- Ensure that info provided is accurate and when appropriate reflects diverging views   2- Ensure that info provided is up-to-date  3- As a francophone, would appreciate tp not have to read the English version to understand
in a few questions i had more than 3, and sometimes less, areas that i felt were of importance. i would have preferred the option of choosing how many were important to me, as well as listing the order of their importance.  
Look at our Southern boarder. You'd be forgiven for thinking we lost WWII.  A constitutional amendment banning money in politics from every level of government in every form would secure our democracy for future generations.
Review and improve health care systems to address major issues that affect patients such as long wait time, physical shortage, outdated or lacked equipment. Dental and eye care should also be included under health coverage. 
World-class in-house government expertise in science, information management, data centres, service to Canadians, and ensuring privacy of Canadians' data. Government data and day-to-day operations should never be privatized!
- build a thriving and prosperous Canada such as a prosperous economy and stable policy .  - increasing people's living level;  creating job opportunities and reducing unemployment rate.  - beautiful and safe environment   
1) Need to limit immigration when unemployment is above 5%,   2) raise interest rates to control inflation (1% is negative real rate),    3) Need some jobs in all fields for people with disabilities and keep stats about it 
Accessible - You need to make sure that you meet Canadians where they are and that engagement/accountability is carried out respecting universal design principles, and recognizing the literacy levels of the audience at-hand
Prioritizing Mental Health of Canadians, and expanding legislation so that more practitioners may provide (Medicare covered) mental health care supports- such as MSWs/ RSWs (master of social work/ registered social workers)
There is a disconnect between being able to offer suggestions, information etc. to the government and the government actually listening to it and acting upon it. That is one reason why cynicism is so high toward government.
A clean and healthy environment with an aim to reduce carbon emissions, Safe and secure Canada in the wake of terrorism, healthy Canadians, innovation and knowledge-based economy, prosperous Canada through global commerce.
I want to get information on how government decisions are made (including but not limited to - guiding principle, prioritization methodologies, evaluation approach and results), not just provide input into decision making.
Lobbyist shouldn't be involved in Canadian health guides, expert advice should be considered, Lobbyist also shouldn't influence initiatives on green energy and environmental concerns, transparency and humane methods of use
Proportional representation is essential to avoid continuous potentially devastating pendulum-swinging.  Avoiding a possibly deadly referendum was probably a mercy.  But it has to come - somehow - before the next election.
Transparency in CRA, are the agents qualified - mistakes at CRA are rampant and it operates more like organized crime than the lean efficient example it should be.  Our revenue agency is extremely inefficient at this time.
Federal government needs to have more influence over education.  The province are not equal in providing the same levels of education to all Canadian children.   The lack of funds in the education systems is unacceptable.
our country is bringing more and more immigrants and workers but the citizens have no jobs...... I am one of them, volunteering myself from last one year and have observed that your qualities and talent is not recognized.
The previous question asked for the top 3, but they are all important.  I'm not familiar enough with the  Open Government initiative to know how they fit in however.  I consider them all important and worthy of attention.
What drives my interest in open government is the collaboration on so many levels of consideration, and the free flowing information in so many variations, and the frank conversations on every topic of the imagination :-)
Concern that more time is spent auditing and reporting than "doing" and how can more open data allow reduction in extensive oversight agencies and regimes while still keeping in mind importance of democratic institutions
1.Make Decisions and those responsible for program management accountable.ie Frigate Program,Sea King program ,jet program .salary administration,Pipe line program. Bureaucracies are incapable of competent management . 
Ensuring that information is provided in a way that is meaningful to the average Canadian such that more available information can make it easier for all Canadians to participate in their government decision making etc.
Proper powers at the federal level for an efficient, transparent government. It is useless for federal to be transparent when everything falls down on provinces or municipalities who do not hold the same accountability.
ALL provinces are important at ALL times, the west often gets overlooked.   The government needs to go to the people of Canada and truly ask what they want, what their vision is and then listen and take that action.   
Canadian forces are embarrassingly underfunded, we need the ability to send our own fleets, air force, and battalions alone and not need to rely on other countries. We need the MV Obelix as much as we need MV Asterix. 
Fair and healthy workplace environment;  Transparent and accountability embedded into government operations and management.  Promotion of Respect for Pluralism that is inclusive of diverse and multi-lingual populations
We need to have it open so Canadians can have their view made on making sure that our Canadians are looked after and not all this outside help that we give.  We need to make sure that our Armed Forces are looked after.
It is also important to me to support science, education and the arts to promote employment and innovation. Increasing harmony between people, with less emphasis on our racial or other differences is also a priority. 
PLEASE STOP BRINGING IN MORE REFUGEES AND UN SKILLED WORKERS, STOP GIVING WELFARE TO THE UNDESERVED OR PLEASE SCREEN THEM THOROUGHLY AND CONTINUOSLY IT IS OUR HARD EARNED MONEY AS TAXES THEY ARE LIVING UPON...PLEASE..
We need better protection for Canadians from unreasonable government surveillance.  Collection of personal data (tapping phones, etc.) needs to be authorized by a judge in all cases, including national security cases.
Phoenix pay system - direct impact to thousands including myself  Category of Employment as a CM who will be deemed a PS in April 2018 no voice in negotiations and limited communications creating anxiety and stress  
When decisions that effect the people such Canada East Pipeline be allowed to vote on the issue rather than have townhall meeting then take down or base the results of that meeting that suits the governments agenda  
.Transparent, accountable and responsive F/Gv`t  . Pay attention on individuals who thinks that they are empowered by chance and superior than others; that they show their negligence, divisive, oppressive, and etc. 
A strong, non political military procurement plan. It is an embarrassment that military servicewomen and men do not have the equipment they need because of political positioning and posturing. This needs to change. 
complete government reform public consultation government spending immigration policies all need to be reviewed i have no faith that this government has any intention of transparency or looking after my interests  
I want an open government that worries less about controlling the message and managing expectations of Canadians and cares more about fulfilling it's mandate and being honest with the public about it's challenges. 
Idealistic as it is, government should be non-partisan. Our leaders, once elected, should be able to put party lines aside and work for what is best for Canadians, rather than jockeying to retain or regain control.
A comprehensive, careful review of the entire taxation system. Not the shitshow you guys just put on trying to ram through changes to small business taxation. And quite possibly not led by a bunch of millionaires.
quit running unconscionable dficits, spending my grandchildren's money by on spurious schemes like Paris Accord absurdities and handicapping competitiveness, taxing rural and poor Canadians through carbon taxing!
Change political party rules ie no need for leader to sign and approve candidates.  No Supreme Court appointments at sole discretion of prime minister. Appointment must be approved by all provincial law societies
transparency in every sense of the word - I would also like the government to improve the image of the political arena to make a career as a politician more appealing to knowledgeable and intelligent individuals 
1- Elected officials live up to and respect promises made and be held responsible when they are not realized.  2- Limit the amount of political contributions of interest groups equal to that of regular citizens.
1. Focus on growing the economy, rather than social re-engineering.  2. Strategically move to raise Canadian population to about 50million over the next decade through increased skilled and economic migration.  
Actively reach out to Canadians to participate in public consultations and report on their views according to different demographic variables, such as sex/gender identify, age, geographic location, income level.
I want government services to provide what they are mandated to do in a timely manner. I do not want to wait weeks and months due to lack of personal or the proper tools / systems / information that they require
bloated government salaries, pensions, and benefit packages  Canadian mining operations in developing countries and other exploitative industrial activities  off-shore tax havens  bank and corporate protections
1. could receive citizen input through computers using 'real-time collaborative problem-solving'  2. could incorporate 'reality checks' to make sure all programs and policies meet peer-reviewed best practices 
because for me it is important a government that promotes social security and health, with transparency in each institution because the nation will continue to be in the first places of growth and development.
Education of our children is one of the most important issues we face.  Simplifying/standardizing student financial assistance rules and application processes across all provinces and territories would help.  
Integrated and logical immigration policy rather than patch work of counter productive immigration policy and reduction of government size and interference in free market economy and reform of justice system.
There have been many issues shared, I would have to really think long and hard about what I've read thus far.  If these things share were a reality then we have plenty to deal with in what is in front of us. 
You forgot racial inclusion and an end to systemic oppression. That should be at the top of the list as systemic racism, INCLUDING systemic antiblackness, is at the root of many of the issues plaguing Canada.
I think the government should allow families from Scotland to live in our country just as he would any other refugee. It's a country if freedom and speech and he should be considerate of others well beings. 
The funding strategy (i.e. need for continuous flow of money...not a yearly 3 to 6 month delay for funding decisions to happen), if fixed, will do a lot towards rectifying accountability and delivery issues.
the governments inability to prioritize issues, in my opinion, that should be higher in my mind, transparency to justify if decisions actually reflect the needs/wants of the many versus the those of the few.
family reunification (immigration)  I do not have any relatives in canada and I can not bring my brother to this country because the law is clear that my first relatives are my parents that still are alive 
The relationship between Indigenous peoples and other Canadians; closing the health, water and food security gaps between Indigenous peoples and other Canadians; keeping and expanding universal health care.
1.  Transparent Government at all levels.    2.  Use referendums  3.  Protect our environment; water, air, land  4.  Equality for all Canadians; safe housing for all, no one should be homeless or hungry.  
Although government of Canada is fair to public, there is monopoly of employers ( Not only private, public but also in government agencies) that is preventing very qualified individuals to  get employment.
Clearly identified linkages between government policy/spending announcements and related scientific/economic research, to show how government decision making will result in the best outcomes for Canadians.
I feel limiting the answers to just three options isn't a good idea in this survey. The survey should allow selection of more options and allow the user to put the priority numbers to the selected options.
I think some of the spending on language training for government staff who don't use/need to use French is a waste of tax payers money. The money could be way better used to provide effective programming. 
Personal Data protection and holding companies that are not responsible with that data responsible. ie criminal negligence for data breaches   Or a way to change my SIN like I do my passwords- constantly. 
reduction of the tensions building internationally. This is a critical time.    first nation's rights.    protecting our lands and resources. They will become valuable down the line. No more bottled water.
Lyme disease is an exploding crisis and is currently being grossly mismanaged.  Much more money and attention must be put into this, including the disabling chronic form of Lyme disease and co-infections.
1. Create a better workplace environment and an exiting workplace to work for youth...  2. Reduce the burden to conduct GoC operations on a day to day.  3. Better accept risk, and no being risk adverse. 
why it's so difficult to get job with any provincial or federal sector in Canada, every time when I apply for job , I do not get the professional respond about my application weather is accepted or not. 
Canada is losing its sovereignty as a result of capitulations to unethical governments abroad - this has to stop or we will be destroyed or consumed by these forces if we don't stand up for our culture.
How about paying our workers and maintaining our websites so we can find something.  I'm recently retired and can't find the form to fill out to get my severance pay.  Nobody can tell me.  Nobody knows.
Please consider the European Union's open data portal as a model or benchmark to improve the Canadian Government's open data portal.  The EU portal is located here: https://data.europa.eu/euodp/en/home 
All of the issues are important. But I feel that three priorities for all forms of Canadian governments should be healthy, wealthy, and wise.  Everything we do should fall under these three categories
Stop lobbyist from influencing  government decisions and not allowing defeated politicians to lobby.   Having a free vote policy for elected officials thereby represent the wishes their constituents. 
Up to date information. The challenge with open data is that it needs to be provided to the public in real time. Real time data is crucial to startups trying to survive in the competitive environment.
I am only allowed to choose 3 of the most important items on the previous list, but there are other points that are also important to me such as a safe country and health and wellbeing is important. 
I'm concerned about secondary students having consistent levels of education across the country. Is the province-mandated control of education still the best model in our increasingly macro world?   
A more effective feedback and inquiry system for holding public officials accountable for their actions, or lack of actions, in situations where they may be violating the human rights of canadians. 
Comment. The pilot program was mailed out to very well off people I tried to contact them and yet no response. I struggle every day and feel it could have benefited my 2 children as I'm a single mom
I believe it is very important that our pubic officials be held accountable by the public and when a public outcry is made against an official that their pay and position be suspended until cleared.
It is important for our leadership to never take a back seat to America on the world stage, but to speak directly to say a North Korea, on behalf of a logical, friendly and cooperative world order. 
When government initiates consultations, look beyond the usual stakeholders. Often frontline folks have deep knowledge about issues and needs, yet their voices arent heard through representatives. 
Accountability is the biggest piece. I would guess that the majority of Canadians feel like government officials are more interested in themselves than in the people they were elected to represent.
It is always good to expose people to questionnaires. It is an efficient way for an insight into people's minds in order to build a collaborative society that would lead to a successful government.
need more criminal charges laid against politicians and supreme court judges to be held accountable for freeing criminals because of status  ie : rich,politician,friend of politician , aboriginal  
1) Increase minimum wage for high living cost areas eg. Vancouver  2) Make high standard living more affordable   3)Decrease price of healthy produce and increase price of unhealthy processed food
Canada should have argued it's case against the Omar Kadhr and not settled for $10.1 Million and paid other foreigners similar financial amounts despite not being repatriated. WRONG, WRONG, WRONG.
I work for the government, and for the past 2 years have heard the lip service regarding phoenix from several sources. Its time to stop the political speech-making and start paying me for my work!
Medical help for the transgender community including teens. The wait at CHEO is almost a year just to get an appointment with the specialist. They have little funding and almost no staff. 
How the government is okay with NOT paying their employees and continuing to waste money for the cost of the Phoenix pay system which does not work and will cost tax payers Billions of dollars.  
I think its ironic that a survey monkey work but have been trying the EI site all day and its not working - again - where are governments priorities? Not with the average Canadian-Shame on you
 Not just a right to housing but a right to affordable housing, we have let down our children horribly.  Election reform to allow the best representation in a way that reflects the actual vote. 
attention to the needs of the most disadvantaged and neediest -- those on reserves without drinkable water, the homeless, those who rely on food banks, those who cannot access needed health care
Government should be creating evidence based policy, not fabricating policy based evidence. Open Government should be structured to allow policing of this tendency, which is endemic to politics.
The federal government is too much concern with the interest of the  minority group at the expense of the interest of the majority group. That mean the interest of the majority group is ignored.
- Transparent, accountable and responsive Federal government   - Strong and mutually beneficial North American partnership   - Innovation and knowledge based economy   - Safe and secure Canada 
Overall better accountability and transparency on what is being spent and done in the government on a day to day basis with an avenue to comment or lobby on the actions being taken or not taken
The previous government did serious damage to Canada's scientific competency and innovation. Scientists need to have the ability to speak about their science, and have it funded by government. 
Easier avenues to interact with government agencies beyond automated hotlines, slow email procedures, etc. A focus on providing equal safety, security, opportunity and support for immigrants. 
I feel your first questions are misleading and require any reasonable person to answer yes.  I find that this survey is slanted and will misrepresent any real opinion the respondent will have.
The best people from each political party should join together.  Politicians should be elected based on merit and ethics.  Citizens should be allowed to vote on issues rather than politicians.
"Elected persons and employees of the government are accountable to the people for their actions and for the decisions they make."  Events suggest they are not deserving of the peoples trust.
Doing away with the Indian act of this country, giving aboriginal people reconciliation and entitlement over lands and working with them to sustain the environment for the future generations.
How about an HONEST Government that does what it says it is going to do and represents ALL Canadians, not just those in the province that will get they the most votes and back in power again!
PleAse do not make deals with USA until the government has changed the current head of state. Wait for the outcome of the Special Council investigation.  I expect others are doing the same.  
Yes, stop wasting taxpayer money on the Phoenix Pay system. This whole debacle has not been transparent whatsoever either for the taxpayer in general or for the worker who is not being paid. 
Government requires real change not just the same people doing things a bit differently. A nimble responsive government cannot be created by the risk averse culture prevalent in government. 
I think if which I have selected 3 options you can get very strong Result.  Because in talking and sharing very cute discussion but in implementing Result will show all Lot of benefits......
Immigration- need to be open and flexible  yet ensure Canadian security. We need to grow our population in order to sustain our way of life ( social programs, supporting our elderlies, etc) 
Responding to the TRC appropriately.  We are failing.  Apologizing is not enough.  Indigenous people should get their land back, should get equal funding for education.  I am non-indigenous.
The sole reason for any government to exist is to protect its citizens' negative rights. It's a testimony to how much politicians are disconnected from reality that it didn't make your list.
Ability of the public to challenge a decision. e.g. I still cant fathom why the express toll way 410 was sold to a private player who are now fleecing Canadians of their hard earned money. 
It was difficult to select the three top choices as more than three are sometimes relatively close in importance; hopefully, my selections reflect most closely my feelings on these matters.
I would like to see government on all levels required to answer questions clearly and directly. There is way too much dancing around particularly by Federal and Provincial representatives.
Old Age Security, Pension, and cost of living matching.  Green Energy Programs & Policy - movement away from fossil fuels more productively and quickly.  Ethics and Morality of Government.
peace and tolerance among all religious institution with fair and equal respect.  the media should show high respect to the efforts of the government and developing peace in the country.  
The economy - more jobs are required, and not just "high-paying skilled tech jobs".  Encourage manufacturing in Canada, "made in Canada", especially in rural areas where jobs are scarce.  
1st.  Eliminate Rothschild banks.  2nd.  You so called educated elites in parliament need to get rid of your lifetime pensions.  You greedy greedy ppl.  3rd.  GET OVER YOURSELVES!!!!!!!!!
A national 'green strategy' that provides clear direction, published federal oversight on provincial levels, and incentivizes both the general public and businesses to accelerate efforts.
I would like more clarity on immigration and refugee policies and costs.  I would also like to see more interest in protection of the host culture and Canadian law in immigration matters.
Protecting the Canadian Culture through secure borders , properly vetted and enforced immigration and immigration laws. Canada has a stop watering it down before it becomes non existent. 
To have an independent and accountable democratic institutions that are working towards improving each Canadians quality of life and the freedoms we are awarded through the Bill of Rights
Why refugees get more money than people on oas that have worked their entire life and can hardly keep our homes.Instead of building low rentals help the people who have a home to keep it.
Government leader cannot hide behind policies anymore.  Good is not good enough.  Elected officials choose to run for office, so Canadian taxpayers should not be their sole pension plan.
1. Smaller government. Be more efficient so that you don't have to steal as much from your people in the form of taxes.  2. Stop overregulating. Let people think for themselves again.  
Being open about consequences when parliamentarians and public servants break the rules -- letting the public know that they'll get more than a slap on the wrist for major misdemeanors.
Canada's personal tax rates are now at the high end: reductions not increases are called for  Government deficit financing is the road to disaster: proper fiscal management is necessary
Canada needs to review the details of global warming. There are significant stugues that prove that data is manipulated. This is being completely ignored by politicians and regulators.
Employment Standards needs to be upgraded and workplace harassment should not only require an expensive lawyer, the law must stop only protecting the business but also the employees.  
Ensuring people have adequate living amounts, putting a cap on how much people can charge for rent, making it easier for first time home buyers to buy a home, a "livable" wage for all 
Investing in sustainable forms of energy   Being a leader in environmental protection   Diverting from fossil fuels  Taxing meat and dairy with the goal of phasing out factory farming 
It's important that I have a say, beyond simply my vote.  This questionnaire was an opportunity for the Government to give me that.  Limiting my responses to only three limited my say.
Concerned about looking after Canadians first, especially our veterans. They get less attention than new immigrants and that is horrible. Who faught for us and should be looked after.
I believe that not all the services and processes are known to Canadians. There should be an easy diagram/road map to Canadian in the Web site so citizens can know where to look/go to
I think the government should engage the public with decisions on the opiod crisis. There is forward thinking retirees with good ideas. Ourvtax dollars need to be used properly.      
Knowing what the government plans to do BEFORE they do it. ie the tax department's attempt to kill small business viability by changing how they interpret tax law. Tacky. Very tacky. 
The government should not be paying huge settlements to people that were tortured in foreign counties.  If the Liberals want they can pay with their personal funds not my tax dollars!
Caring for our veterans. Honoring the sacred obligation. Putting soldiers injured in Afghanistan on lifelong pensions for injuries sustained in combat and making them retroactive !!!
I think our leader is probably the most transparent and has put Canada on the world stage.  These are important because they show the world what our objectives are and how we govern.
I would like to see opportunities for people to express themselves in a way that is positive and they are being listened to and not feeling ignored or their opinion does not matter. 
My only concern is that having paid into CPP all my working life (over 50 years and still working, cause I can't live on the poverty pay of CPP and OAS... pay outs should be TAX FREE
Questions could have explored ways in which Official Languages can be leveraged to help ensure a full and meaningful implementation of Open Government across all of Canadian society.
I would have checked off more from the previous list re prosperous Canadian economy that has a strong social conscience and is committed to meets the needs of those less fortunate  
A greater focus on reconciliation with Indigenous peoples of Canada. Better accountability to Indigenous peoples of Canada. More funding allocated to Indigenous peoples of Canada. 
Access to information that leads to decisions affecting Canadians is vital. Governments need to be courageous and stop protecting party interests at the expense of open governance.
Canada needs a national identity card that can digitally serve to identify Canadians and track all licenses on a single platform. The Estonian ID card is an example to investigate.
Disclosure of corporate and personal lobbying on, and benefiting from, government policies; particularly in the   areas of licensing, resource exploitation and medical/drug policy.
Safeguarding what we have. We as Canadians cannot sell our assets, whether those assets are natural resources, Canadian content and patents or skills- they have to stay in Canada! 
Follow the Westminster model more closely by giving more power to the rank and file ministers to vote against the PMO's decisions; make PMO more accountable to local constituents.
Well-rounded liberal education available to all. I know education is generally a provincial responsibility, but high national standards of quality and accessibility are important.
Site to see proposed bills, track progress of bills (including private member)   clearly laid out along with members votes. You can find this now but I find it difficult to view.
Defend our Borders we are a huge country with a small Armed Forces and not capable of defending it any better than the 1st Nations did on our arrival......look at them now......
Eliminate downloading of clerical duties onto non-clerical employees. Doesn't make sense making an electrician struggle through numerous "paperwork" duties at their rate of pay.
Greatly simplified contracting, grant and contribution and hiring processes that focus on people and citizens instead of process.  Introduce human engagement into the processes.
I'm going to sue, to many times has the government broken the law and walked away..  I have no faith in our leaders.  we need direct democracy based on people not political lies
the government should look after the canadian  first ! before bringing other people from other country.    CANADIAN NUMBER 1 BEFORE ANY ONE. THAT ALL I AS TO SAY! CANADIAN FIRST
Transparency avoids so many wrongs. Also lets get the government off the back of small business.  Finally the teen hotline was closed in Calgary. I think this was a catastrophe.
Cuts in health care funding to the provinces higher provincial taxes as a result.     A fairer and juster taxation system.    Canadian values which resonate for all Canadians. 
external  out side Canada so many people language related communication directly some visual program add website butter for all search criteria people it's good for all of you.
I want government to represent the view of the majority, not just vocal minor interest groups just because they are able to orchestrate media campaigns, for example Greenpeace.
Strong statesmanship among our politicians who value and apply a code of ethics that focuses on service for the good of Canada not their own pockets or just their constituents.
This survey should have allowed either ranking of answers and/or and "all of the above" option. Many of these options are mutuality inclusive so it makes sense to allow this.  
A transparent, accountable, and responsive government shouldn't even be something people need to worry about when they elect a leader, but the fact that they do is worrying...
I hate calling 1-800's as never seem to get the correct person or department (IF Answered)  and then being referred to another number. Only to be repeated over and over again.
The adjustment of what is considered "making under the poverty line" and "middle class", with taking in the consideration of what is now considered a need in today's society. 
Diversifying a resource based economy so the government budgets to not rely on the price of commodities to balance the budget, and in the end do away with transfer payments. 
Have government workplaces that are truly respectful and have employees who truly have integrity.  Stop the waste of resources by playing management ordered harassment games.
I wish our government would take care of our people first and stop spending our tax money on immigrants. Sorry but its not fair that they get treated better than Canadians. 
Keeping our borders safe not allowing illegal immigrants to cross the border, and not allowing anyone who left to fight for ISIS to return to Canada including their families.
Leveraging the creativity and vision of Canadians by making location-based socio-economic data more available, including capacity-building (tutorials, etc.) on how to use it.
Who influenced changes to food regulations and implementation?  It appears the changes help industry govern themselves and are not in the best interest of ordinary Canadians.
Liberals promised they would return life long pensions for vetrans. I am holding them to that before the next election, not in another promise to do it later. Make it happen
Trudeau needs to step down as prime minister of Canada! As a born Canadian, I am not happy with Mr. Trudeau I feel the substitute teacher needs to go back to private school.
Apart from a clean and safe environment, it is important to address the fact that natural resources are being overused and almost destroyed in some areas of the territory. 
Continue looking out for and supporting average Canadians, being open and improving international relations.  Healthcare and jobs are always incredibly important as well.  
CRA Should be spending less time on audits on earners with under $100K a year income.    Phoenix should be recovering ZERO dollars from overpayments until EVERYONE is paid.
Federally controlled senior housing and care - no more private companies taking advantage of seniors needs and charging enormous fees for seniors to maintain their dignity.
These are my priorities for openness and transparency in government where government needs to build more trust with Canadians, not necessarily overall government priorities
being able to vote on issues and not letting the government make decisions just because they are in power. This should be done by people that are registered to have a vote
Transparency and accountability from Senators and Members of Parliament with respect to spending and conflicts of interest.Appropriate punishment for offenders of the law.
I would like Canada to be able to say that all of its people are taken care of equally--all cultures, all language groups, all geographic situations, all ages and stages.
Make sure to keep education on a top priority and begin to put more into mental health, especially for those of aboriginal descent and new immigrants to help them adjust.
Privacy. In the age of technology and the internet, the right to privacy must be protected amongst all else. No government spying. No corporate collection of information.
Provide the funding details that the Canadian govt provides to other countries.   The number 1 priority should the well being of Canadians before we help out other people
- Previous question on priorities with respect to open govermnent is flawed; not all prioriites (e.g. environmental and social) are directly impacted by an OG policy.   
It is of great importance for citizens to be able to fully exercise their citizenship in a highly democratic environment, respecting individual and collective interests.
provide work for abused women vs. putting them in women's shelters and vs giving them handouts. Make the abuser go to a shelter for those who cannot control their anger.
Simply being able to understand the reasoning behind the decisions that are being made that affect any portion of the population will help people accept those decisions.
Transparancy of information is key to open, informed discussion, and public participation.  It is also critical for citizen respect and trust in democratic institutions.
1. Income security for Canadians, especially given changes in the reality of employment.   2. Closing tax loopholes that benefit the wealthy at the expense of society. 
Inclusion. Although diversity is an important priority, there appears to be a loss of focus on inclusion of all groups, including those who do not qualify as a minority
It's important for citizens to input into government decision-making in a meaningful way, and understand fully how government officials have arrived at their decisions.
tangible procedure to recover money that is mis-spent  Quit the mentality of scapegoating individuals and rather think of how to make processes immune to dark practices
To add to one of my most important of the 16 initiatives, diversity, inclusion and dual language must include a focus on First Nations as well as Quebec and minorities.
I want a government who is open and honest about every aspect of day to day  operations. I find that this government is not open to the Canadian people in all aspects.
The ability to access and use the data, i.e. availability of data in formats in addition to xml such that an average individual can employ the data quickly and easily.
The federal government, largely, is hard to access, impossible to navigate and hinders efficient execution of even simple tasks. Please improve your public interface. 
Too much Federal Gov't attention is paid to Ontario and Quebec and not spread evenly throughout the country. Fair and equitable government attention from east to west.
As long as I have been voting, we have been working on poverty and basic standards of living.  These are still issues and don't seem to get better.  Very frustrating.
The ability of citizens of Canada to work globally, yet maintain a home base in Canada without the burden of time quotas for cancellation of provincial medical plans.
The issue of ensuring that university and college students are able to find jobs in their field. Perhaps reorganizing the education system to reflect real life jobs.
- Tax programs (hopefully lower taxes)  -  More services and programs  -  More help and benefits for seniors (60 Should be the age of such benefits and programs).. 
Discussion on how Canada is going to be in the future should never be discussed behind closed doors. It should be very open to anyone who has a passion to change it
Executive accountability to the integrity of the policies/programs and systems for which they are responsible - not on "delivering" regardless of the consequences. 
Fiscal restraint.  We should be doing everything possible to reduce our national debt.  The government has become irresponsible with how they spend our tax dollars!
Observance of the rights of work and rest. Stable and decent income of citizens and residents of Canada. Simplify the norms for those who wish to migrate to Canada.
-proportionate representation in government -provincial /territorial and federally.   -programs to help people get re-training when personal funds are not available
better TRANSIT SYSTEM , PROVIDE JOB OPPORTUNITY FOR YOUNG GRADUATES COMING OUT EVERY YEAR FROM THE SCHOOL, INNOVATION AND KEEP OUR MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY IN CANADA
-easy access to open data - all government databases should be accessible, the public should have same access as analysts (considering privacy or security issues).
Knowing the reason why a campaign promise has not been met. In understanding that it is not always feesible to meet them all, the reason why would be nice to know.
solar power for people, and non profits, and stop funding and making pipelines - get rid of fossil fuels and make solar factories cutting edge in alberta instead. 
I want honest people with the voice of their community to fight for the majority not the minority and no more unregulated immigration protect Canada for Canadians
I would like to be able to have a private conversation with both federal and provinical levels of goverment.  My main concern is what our money is being spent on.
Not trying to be politically correct, not trying to run and control everything and just being able to set measures, laws and safety policies in place for society.
THE AMOUNT THAT A SENIOR GETS THAT WE PAID INTO UNTIL 65 MINE IS LESS THAN 10000 YEARLY  WHY DO PARENTS NOT HAVE THE RIGHTS TO CLAIM THERE CHILDREN ON THEIR TAXES
Don't hire the same people/firm that is responsible for the Phoenix pay system debacle. Next time, make sure you have adequate and competent (change) management.
Improving lives of Aboriginal Canadians (participation in democracy and public discourse, better health outcomes, improved standard of living, poverty reduction)
Reduction of duplicated roles within the federal gov't.  Earth-first, always. Dis-easing our children's environment for the sake of dividends is, simply ARCHAIC!
Government following through on commitments, especially when they are potentially revenue neutral such as the privacy concerns in Bill C-51 or electoral reform.
Government is inherently inefficient and secretive. Government should concentrate on the economy and efficiency and avoid social engineering which doesn't work.
Our government needs to do more for first nation communities starting with clean water for, affordable food and housing, education and health.  VERY IMPORTANT!!
Wellness of the population, achieved by addressing the social determinants of health (and sound environmental husbandry) are obviously of fundamental importance
Access to information and the people that control it via electronic means and a protocol that requires civil servants to respond in a fulsome and timely manner
Get rid of the first past the post system.One person, one vote, for one person. Simple and fair. Also, no job should be a lifetime appointment like the Senate.
Heath access for migrant kids. Currently if a kid is in need of medical attention and don't have a private health insurance, medical cost are extremely high.  
Quicker response to issues related to environment, species at risk, and conservation, and being able to track that response  Open data  Access to information  
Strong and independent democratic institutions  Transparent, accountable and responsive Federal government  Well managed and efficient government operations   
To share knowledge about First Nations history in relation to federal relationships/agreements/treaties etc. The general public does not understand the issues.
With a 'diverse society' goal, I'd like to see more focus and open behaviour with the government about how Aboriginal peoples' issues are handled specifically.
all needed issues properly mentioned as in Canada today we need more alert public ready to  report and spoil possible threats of terrorism in North America...
I think Canadians are tired of elected parties that make promises while campaigning then promptly through them out the window the minute they get into Office.
In my opinion, open government is an important issue but we need to think about the security and the highest protocol in implementing this kind of government.
Healthy Canadians, clean and healthy environment, vibrant culture for all Canadian, a proserous Canada through global commerce and a well manged government. 
It was hard to answer which 3 were most important to me in a couple of the questions! I liked many of the choices and hope work will continue on all of them.
We live in a data oriented society. The government needs to present data to facilitate data based decision making in a standard and easily consumable format.
We need a government function like Pew Research to take polls of issues of the day and produce tabulations of how Canadians feel about those current issues. 
Citizens should be able to interactively participate in decision, policy making, as long as adequate facts are provided to support informed decision making.
Prioritize the human rights of marginalized folks in Canada, including Indigenous, Refugee Status, Persons of Colour, Children in Care, and LGBTQIIA folks. 
Public information on the progress of the department mandates that were presented to them at the beginning of there term. Any changes should be highlighted.
That policy decisions would be made with informed consultation with the scientific community  i.e. Environment, education, independence from USA in policies
Within Government the actual management has to be more transparent on plans, actions, where funding is going, are our partners First Nations being engaged. 
Accountability. Currently told time frame is 35 weeks to add Guarantee Income Supplement  to OAS. 35 weeks is beyond reason. Who can wait 35 weeks for GIS.
Amend the Access to Information & Privacy Acts as well as PIPEDA to 21st Century expectations for personal privacy and open and more responsive disclosure.
Create an opportunity to make youth and adult more independent by working   Create more jobs and business and less dependency on tax and government funds. 
provide assistance to native communities to give children hope and opportunities  pay and compensate for losses due to disgraceful payroll system federally
That the Government treat all Provinces fairly, our present Government appears to have forgotten about Manitoba being the center and a big part of Canada. 
you limited the choices to 3 and perhaps it should be 4 or 5 - the items around knowledge based economy and income security are also very important to me. 
Affordable housing for Vancouver residents exclusively.  Heavy restrictions on foreign buyers/investors in the real estate sector especially in Vancouver.
Legislative change to strengthen the functions and powers of the Public Sector Integrity Commissioner and the Conflict of Interest and Ethics Commissioner
Lower my taxes, give me someone to talk to about my issues and hold yourselves accountable on spending and policy as if it was your life you were changing
Quickly improve immigration rules and levels and also help Canadian businesses to provide reliable long-term work opportunities for international workers.
Recognition of our colonial past, and working towards the day that every Canadian is equal in legal status, and has the same opportunities as every other.
Stop putting Canada in debt. Remove all Native treaties as we have given them enough money. Stop giving Canada's money away to try and buy yourself votes.
Efficient and systematic consultation with citizens to identify problems to be solved and their relative priority. Either directly or through Parliament.
Specificity of online access.    For example: a page on immigration should include data already and not waste the taxpayers' time trying to find the data
The fact that we have not been utlizing the Hemp crop to its full abilities. FOR FUCKS SAKE !!!! we could end high pollution levels simply by growing it.
There is a negative regards by many towards our politicians government which could make it difficult to attract the right people..not sure how to solve. 
We need more programs for the lower income people.  The programs we have are good, but it can be so much better because we're a good, prosperous country.
You guys have got to take a psych 101 course and stop asking leading questions in your questionnaires. Seriously, you're not doing yourself any favours. 
A carbon economy that stimulates Alternative energies and penalises Oil and polluting industries, Discourage self regulation (see US bank 2008 fiasco), 
accessibility for all - ensuring funding reaches and impacts those it is intended to server or help, look at ways to reduce waitlists for critical needs
Any attempt to obtain feedback from citizens must be done in an unbiased manner. No limiting, leading questions like the ones you find in MP newsletters
financial stability of Canadians is dependent on money available for spending, under current government household available cash ahs diminished by 8-15%
1. Canada's safety & security needs to be taken seriously.   2.  Government accountability.   3. responsible spending; Canadians need a better budget  
Accountability specifically to the Indigenous population within Canada, and to upholding the calls to action of the truth and reconciliation commission
Dealing with people who are in some way marginalized, solving the problems encountered by indigenous Canadians and finding a way for them to succeed.  
Personal/Cultural time off. For many vulnerable religious groups, they are denied employment off or unpaid leave to practice their religious holidays. 
the recruitment process for public service should be more transparent i.e publish number of candidates selected to which post in each recruitment drive
Do not use services like SurveyMonkey that save my data in the United States. I do not trust them to protect my data against intrusive US authorities.
Legal Immigration, Healthy Boundries.  Respecting the Rich Resources Canada Has and Stop putting down Business in Resources and All Business Sectors. 
well managed and efficient government operation,take control on the housing market price..Equal opportunity for internationally educated professionals
A lobby list that includes all meetings and bank accounts.  'If You've seen them, You Must surrender all Your Books to public now.  Zero tolerance ! 
Government needs to carefully consider the unintended consequences of releasing open data on communities or populations.  E.g. insurance implications
Promotion of the open government initiatives; making sure that citizens are made aware of the availability of open data and transparency information.
Provide more ways to be able to get youth involved with politics, so that they can make educated decisions and opinions regarding events in politics.
* Achieving sustainability by making the earth able to support human life & Promote sustainable development through harnessing innovation capacities
In addition, what I also find important is economic growth and transparent, accountable and responsive federal, provincial and municipal governments
Lack of ethical standards amongst government leaders; duplicity of government actions vs government words; ineffective leadership at federal levels 
Minister of Finance needs to be more transparent - etc. "forgetting" about one of his houses in France and writing laws to protect his own interests
Secure income and work environment with a place that you can safely relay concerns about things that are not being done correctly in your workplace.
We need to sponsor more Canadian startups and continue to attract new investment in STEM for children, particularly girls and racialized Canadians. 
The apparent failure to consider the historical errors of the "British Crown" during our pre-1840-1867 Colonial and also in our post-1867 times!.  
Accountability across different governments (i.e. making former government officials accountable for poor/negligent decisions during their tenure)
Clean energy; elimination of financial subsidies to fossil fuel producers; taking action to counter man-caused climate change; no more pipelines. 
please measure he entrance of immigrants with high risk of been terrorist. you should think first on keeping us safe.  Don't bring the enemy home 
Spend some actual time looking after the needs of veterans of the Afghanistan War - these people need the governments help and are not getting it,
Leadership to transfer initiatives within the Federal Government into Canadian Society (eg promoting workplaces free of harassment and violence).
Opportunity to visit various Federal Gov workplaces before applying to work. "A day in the life of" shadowing type opportunity before committing.
The accountability of politicians if funds/projects are miss managed the same legal actions should be applied like on a regular none VIP citizen.
the previous list includes items that should be just included without saying...safe place for ALL canadians regardless of gender, race, sex, etc.
Too many forms too fill out adds to too much confusion.  Streamlining paperwork would assist government agencies as well as the people it serves.
Government efficiency, what is the government doing to improve processes and operations, so that they can be more effective in service delivery.
not allowing people to stay in the country who have entered illegally, not letting immigrants in that are incompatable with Canadian way of life
One personally important aspect to me, is having continuity between provinces.  The same rules for provincial managed programs, taxes, laws etc.
Technology, Innovation & Science key aspects of Socio-technical systems transformations in order to face new world sustainable Development goals
The excessive spending by this Government is driving Canadians into a third world country and our children and grandchildren will suffer for it.
To make Canada in global development as first to do for the world environment and policies that will provide happiness Gross index not just GDP 
Government should take proper and strict measures to keep Canadian safe from terrorist attack faced by different Western and European countries
When requesting feedback from citizens, that feedback is listened to. There's no point in asking if there's zero intention of paying attention.
1. Information on clean and affordable housing for all income groups.  2. Information on investment in public transportation is made public.  
After 27 letters only 2 answered where they received and address from government directory   a simple letter yes we received it speaks volumes
Being able to access information on gc.ca. I prefer the old system where departments and agencies had own websites (information easy to find).
Canadians seek information that is easily understood (i.e, in plain language) and exposes not just the success stories but also the struggles.
Government is currently using claims of diversity and inclusion to discriminate against certain groups in favour of minorities. This must stop
Quit catering to special interest groups  People bypassing the methods of entering Canada legally.  Ridiculous money settlements for law suits
Straight answers from government about what they are doing and why, rather than spin, double-speak and vague, wordy and non-committal answers.
I want electoral reform, much stricter environmental protection, basic income, and free post-secondary education/student debt forgiveness.   
I expect government to know better than it's citizens. I don't think citizen consultation to be applied to what they are not specialists at.
I would appreciate the possibility of speaking with a person by a telephone call in case I need specific information regarding a transaction
Prescription medicines paid for by general taxation instead of patients having to pay.  It works in the UK and they pay less tax than we do.
Meeting the needs of veterans as was campaigned for by the Prime Minister, specifically bringing back pensions for ill and injured veterans
Most people influence and measure performance of the government decisions through voting - this should be added to mechanisms of engagement
My concerns rests mostly on the realistic execution of these worthy endeavors on papers.... Not impressed with the results after two years.
Open government requires sufficient staff time to 1. speak to Canadians, 2. organize and file documentation, and 3. preserve documentation.
Protect the working class against poverty due to technological advancements causing job displacement (robot workers) in the coming decades.
Systemic change toward collaboration and mutual goals rather than adversarial relationships that waste time and energy between politicians.
That government address the Lyme disease crisis in Canada by actively  engaging all stakeholders, most important of which are the patients.
THE CANADA REVENUE AGENCY NEEDS TO BE MORE ACCOUNTABLE. IT IS THE ONLY PLACE WHERE YOU ARE PRESUMED GUILTY AND HAVE TO PROVE YOUR INNOCENCE
Allowing  the public to access info and data openly gives them and other depts the opportunity to see linkages we wouldnt see otherwise. 
Complete revamping of tax system to create fairness, promote economic growth and STOP driving the country to the lowest common denominator
Dissapointed that important issues of the 16 reccomended does not include something on religious rights, particularly with C-16 in Quebec.
Do not make any agresion on other country like Libia, Irak and Afganistan.  Do not participate in domestic politics of others countries.  
Ensure that no Canadian is left out when it comes to food, shelter, healthcare, needed medicines and mental health and general well being.
Greatly concerned about the current government's lack of transparency and very long delays with regards to Access to Information requests.
Having a fairly representative government through fixing the unfair voting system and bring clean drinking water to all people of Canada. 
I see very little help for people who have visual or invisible disabilities. Where is there financial help for citizens with disabilities?
Instead of focusing on spending and accumulating, focus on being environmentally friendly and aware of the resources that we are misusing.
MP's salary and pay - does not reflect the amount of work they do, it should be much lower.  MP's spending should be closely scrutinized. 
The creation of the trust and confidence ,strengthen / innovate / ...and make all the government structures a unique model in the world . 
This government doesn't know the meaning of open. It has completely done a 180 on it's take and is now acting like the Harper government. 
Actively encouraging younger generations to vote and educating them on how they can contribute to their country's wellbeing and progress.
Governments holding secret talks with other nations as Canada/US did at Montebello during the last administration. Should not be allowed.
I want to see electoral reform leading to some form of proportional representation.  Will vote for the party to delivers on this promise.
Stop spying on Canadians, and disclose your participation in spying initiatives that happen behind closed doors with foreign governments.
There is a disconnect between various government departments at various levels .They should be more knowledgeable about each others work.
Would suggest more than three could be selected in the previous question (3 out of 16 strategic priorities is not very many). thank you! 
Creating livable city, Improving city transport, making more space for pedestrians, mandatory bike lines and Veemo stile transportation.
Revisiting employment equity designated groups.  I understand their historical... motivations but find them to discriminatory and racist
Streamlining services so interactions with the government are easier, ie making forms very clear, having staff available for questions. 
The government represents everyone.  Keep that in mind and do not cave to minority opinions just because they have the ear of the media.
TPP will benefit foreign corporations to the detriment of Canadian interests and Canada should not participate unless this is addressed.
- All public spending should be disclosed as Open Data. In particular, per diem expenses by gov't employees (in a standardized format).
Based on observations and experiences a revamp of revenue and justice systems will lead to better health outcomes for all going forward
Improvement and development of the system of public kindergartens and maternity support (breastfeeding) within 1 year of a child's life
Reduce government involvement to security of person and property and rule of law. Everything else is a baby step to totalitarian rule. 
access to information in a timely fashion at little or no cost. Diversity and inclusion, global safety and security, healthy Canadians
Government being accountable to the citizens   Decision-making and how it supports responsible, accountable and transparent government
Simplify. Everything has become so complicated for even the professionals we need to hire professionals to understand issues and laws.
Balance between pluralism and a common vision of Canada based on universal respect and adherence to our Constitution and rule of law.
Control un- necessary government spending on futile projects that hurt Canadians economical prosperity by increased income tax rates.
-HELPING PEOPLE FOR LIVE IN PEACE AND SAFE WITHOUT ANY WAR WITH ANY ONE IN CANADA OR OUTSIDE CANADA  IN THE ALL WORLD IN THE PLANET. 
I what to know what the government is doing to positively influence the private sector to reflect an inclusive and diverse workforce.
To make sure that other powerfull   countries   and leaders do not impede and and expect us to be thier source of money and resources
Climate change has to be our #1 priority which will help us transition to a new economic model. A model that includes First Nations.
I chose 3 items on the previous page. Income security and employment, Healthy Canadians, and Innovation and knowledge based economy.
Phoenix fiasco - want to know where all my cases are in the queue, and get accurate and timely information about what is being done.
Stop income distribution at the expense of a) encouraging laziness and b) discouraging innovation, risk taking and entrepreneurship.
This question is kind of broad. What do you mean miss anything? If it was more specific I might have written a legitimate response. 
Transparency in our courts! Ending Judicial Protection, making Judges accountable for their abuse of power and violating of rights! 
Voting for policies on a national level. Much like officials are elected. Using SINs to sign into the Government of Canada website. 
I don't believe the government listens or cares. They follow their own agenda and treat the workers with barely concealed contempt.
I want to be able to know what the government is doing and not have some newspaper or TV news report telling me and its always bad!
Moving oil and gas natural resources via new pipelines to tidewater should be a top priority and achieved before the next election.
In the real world, if you are insufficient in doing a job,you are relived of your duties,(fired) not transferred to another job.  
Open, honest and transparent government encourages democratic participation and reduces the risk of corruption within government. 
Oversight of bureaucrats, i.e. conflict of interests, lobbying and deep industry ties that make them make bad decisions knowingly.
Why are we only allowed to select 3. Not very transparent for the so called transparent LIEBERALS. This is quite self serving!!!!!
This questionnaire does not ask what things are not important.  There are things our taxes pay for that I do not want to pay for.
Very hard to pick just 3 out of the 16 priorities -- not sure that is going to be useful. Health care is also very very important
misuse of taxpayers money, the government needs to listen to tax payers concerns before earmarking funds to spend in communities
A web portal as a platform for public to interact with highest official (say PM) to suggest and improve particular local issue.
Compensation (Salary++++) disclosure of top 20 employees in each and every department, ABC, crown agency - especially CPPIB.   
The slow elimination of the UNIONs they have become a nightmare causing more grief than help to either the employee or employer
I would like to know more about the Reconciliation process and have a clear understanding of negotiations in a timely manner.
Improve and support the laws for victims of crime.  Prevent any and serious environmental disasters.  No corruption anywhere.
Having proper representation of every group in the country so decisions are not skewed in favor of one group over the other.
Influence on Government decision making. It would be incredible to have the option to vote on policy options as they arise. 
National population plan that is environmentally sustainable.  Economic growth and immigration should conform to this plan. 
Transparent, accountable and responsive Federal government   Income security and employment   Clean and healthy environment 
1. Public consultation on policies is extremely important to me.  2. A government that listens to the people they work for.
Access to big data; how government is leveraging third parties (not just lobbyists, but also consultants and intellectuals)
appropriate and effective spending on military preparedness to meet the Nato requirement of 2% of GDP.  Security of Canada.
Working on Individuals of single low income bracket that get slipped in the cracks of not getting on government assistance.
Departments and individuals need to be held accountable for overspending and blunders such as the Phoenix pay-roll system.
Having governments explain all the modifiers of a decision. Not just use public input to substantiate a foregone decision.
In a transparent government, all previous points/topics are important. Why only three?  I would have selected all!!!!!!!!!
Unless I missed it anywhere - the issues that overshadow everything else are global warming and environmental degradation.
1) Open government regarding job applications for new employees.  Transparency, reporting, tracking submission status.   
helping canadians understand financing by teaching them in schooling on how to manage, budget and use credit effectively.
Responsive government departments and services (ie I shouldn't have to wait for 6 months for an income tax re-assessment)
Thank you for the opportunity to participate in this survey. The results of the survey would be of great interest to me. 
The prime minister should look after real Canadians and get off these refugees stop waisting money support real canadians
Ideally I would love Canada to move towards liquid democracy. So any steps in that direction would be more than welcome.
Eliminate all defined benefits pensions.  Track all spending in government contracts and make info available to public.
I want to access information easily through different mediums, for those that don't understand computer communications 
Proportional Representation Elections for a true democratic Canada, our current election system is outdated and unfair.
This is awesome, please consider local radio ads to have as much people learn of these federal questionnaires.   Cheers
A country that works proudly with its indigenous partners to discover common priorities to benefit everyone in Canada.
Should a government that is in collusion of know terrorist activities or ideologies be asked to step down immediately.
Water both Renewable and Non Renewable and why we it is not on the Hit list of things we should taking better care of.
Ensuring existing programs are meeting needs of Canadians and continue to be appropriate for the changing population.
I want my vote to count.  The election is determined before I get off work to vote here in Alberta. That disturbs me.
Strict Conflict of interest reporting requirements for SENIOR government officials including cabinet ministers and PM
There should be no difference between what elected officials are doing and what they are saying. No spin just truth. 
With accountability, it is also important for government to practice equity and fairness (not equality... but equity)
 Government is too sheltered and not aligned with the normal Canadian. Too many only interested being in Government.
Bring back people to answer the calls when we call government departments or agencies. For example, Revenue Canada. 
Milestones and gauging where government is with respect to a particular endeavour and charting the course as needed.
the fact that we had this confederation thing in 1867,and we still build walls between each other really bothers me.
1.  the gov should maybe concentrate on doing 1 thing at a time and do it well, .. working on quality not quantity 
1. When are we getting proportional representation and changes to the first past the post voting systemas promised.
3 options for selection is too restricted. I want to include Climate and Environment. and what about the terrorism?
Creating electoral rights for non-residents beyond 4-5 years. i.e. The right to vote for long term Canadian expats.
Effort To engage young generation in the conversation shaping better Canada, as they are the future of this country
Free dental care provided to all Canadians, it is as important as other forms of health care which are already free
I had multiple responses for the previous question. There were only three things that were not that important to me
Of the sixteen top priorities, they are all important - so limiting choice to three may not lead to a good outcome.
Preventing partisan institutions from continuing to gain an unconstitutional foothold in our country's democracy.  
They are all so very important that I am uncertain as to how a government could not address them all as priorities.
Treating veterans fairly and equitably; something that is sorely missing today in the New Veterans Charter of 2006.
coordination of services for seniors at all levels of government: municipal, provincial, federal and International
financial responsibility  no more financing and debt to cover perceived social programs  can afford, or not afford
I appreciate that citizens are being asked to weigh in on issues that are important to them. Thanks for listening!
Not continually reorganizing public data websites as it impacts accessibility, consumes users resources and time. 
Providing shelter and home to war/economic refugees - being a country that dignifies those who have been displaced
there needs to be a process to recall members of a party that fail any legal or ethical issues before an election.
transparency is really about honesty and getting around the talking points that inept MPs spew by the shovel full.
Would be nice if politicians answered questions without prevaricating.  Straight answers for straight questions.  
Eliminate the political bias and lies in the media; CBC is totally biased - it is very very blantantly obvious.  
Government employees should have integrity and be honest and accountable. The position should uphold these values
I would like to see fish and wildlife protection included in the clean and healthy environment strategic outcome.
Less focus on economy and more on social issues.  Looking at a new world order based on what makes a just society
To take care of First nations living conditions before taking care of other countries social liveable conditions.
Fix phoenix  cancel bill c27  remove Morneau as minister of finance as his conflicts of interest are out of hand
Health care service need more fast, waiting few weeks for special doctor, its not fair this first world country.
Nothing was missing but it was difficult to prioritize three as there are several priorities that are important.
Recognize diversity of different geographical regions.  What matters to Toronto isn't the same as rural Ontario.
We need less governement for less money. A whole department of official languages is not helping our tax burden.
1. Protect net neutrality, including making Canada a global internet host if the US eliminates net neutrality  
a law to stop differentiating between majority and minority in Canada. We should promote we are all Canadians. 
For the people of Canada to have income above the poverty line through either employment or government subsidy.
Government websites that provide easy access to substantive information about programs, policies and decisions.
I am very interested in our military and ensuring they have what they need to do the job we entrust them to do.
Resist putting everything online. Many vulnerable people can not access these services if they are electronic. 
streamline government, the government can't be all things to all people.  Pick the priorities and do them well.
That the government will allow health Canada to give a, DIN to medical cannabis obtained through prescription  
Validating that Canada HAS ONLY two official languages for written/verbal communication with ENGLISH and FRENCH
Why do we still have the Phoenix system who have fd up the payroll system???  Sue them or fire the bastards!!!!
A well managed health care system with a national drug strategy  Transparency in government policy and actions
central location to list and track all campaign promises, and measurable status updates with eventual outcomes
Connections and collaborations between academic organizations and government to undertake studies and research
Electoral reform - I wish the government would act on this important promise it made during the last election.
Ensuring government employees and department heads are well qualified, honest, and dedicated to public service
Improving health care  More effective and realistic immigration policy that benefits Canada in the longer term
Indigenous relations. I cannot believe it was not on there. Please fix the Canadian - Indigenous relationship.
Educating Canadians about Canada's relationship with the rest of the world - environmentally and politically.
Government caring about the average Canadian- Self employed, families with disabled children, senior citizens
in general this is a very limiting survey. its impossible to get even a quarter of the concerns on this page.
The need to accelerate the process of Digital Inclusion, especially the infrastructure needed in rural areas.
Alignment of expenditures with the economic reality... how is the GOC saving for another rainy day (2008)?  
Funding scientific research and Translational research to find treatment / cures for lung and heart diseases
Government should not try to create jobs. Let private enterprise do that by removing barriers to employment.
How about providing interactive service instead of a bunch webpages that keep referring back to each other. 
TAKING MEASURES IN OPENING UP MORE UNIVERSITIES IN ONTARIO AND MORE HOSPITALS SO WAITING PERIODS ARE REDUCED
Election reform.  Canadian resources for Canadians (no more foreign water sales, oil grabs, land grabs etc)
Receiving feedback from my contacts with the Government and then, up-to-date data re that particular topic.
Setting our response to climate change as a primary consideration in all government policies and programmes
1. Safe and secure Canada  2. Fair and Secure workplace  3. Transparent and Accountable Federal Government
All of the areas listed are of interest to me. It was very difficult to choose the most important answers.
As a researcher, I want to be able to understand the cost and outcomes of government policies and programs
Helping Albertan oil used by Montreal refineries rather than importing foreign oil from dictator countries
Im tired of hearing the PM tell me what "Canadians" want!  He does not represent my views as a "Canadian".
Info on action plan and progress about how the government many department interacts to make things happen 
Lack of accountability for government bureaucrats who think that they do not have to comply with the law, 
Meaningful and modern-day electoral reform in order to prompt a diversity of voices within our parliament.
Policy making determined by reflecting individual Canadians' self-defined expectations of quality of life.
1) Citizen privacy (non-intrusive gov't)  2) Freedom of Speech  3) Easily accessible public information  
ALL CANADIAN GOVT OFFICES MUST BE WITH MACHINE READABLE ATTENDANCE SO THAT NO PERSONAL INFLUENCE INVOLVED
Easier access to MY OWN data.  I want to know everything that all areas of the government knows about me.
Funding for the Canadian General Standards Board, a unique collaboration entity in the federal government
healthy Canadians, strong vibrant culture, secure and mutually beneficial relationship with north america
Honesty and fairness in government - not dividing Canadians by calling small business owners tax cheats. 
We need less government, not more.  Better control on immigration.  Less rights and benefits for refugees
1. Self-governance for Indigenous people  2. Improved access to vital services to Indigenous communities
Access to psychologists as well as psychiatrists for diagnosis and treatment of mental health disorders.
Accountability and higher standards in public education. Increased support for post secondary education.
Government and companies should have more collaboration to build a strong technology backbone for Canada
PAY YOUR FUCKING EMPLOYEES CORRECTLY! YOU HAVE BEEN PERFORMING LIKE RUSSIA AFTER THE BREAKUP OF THE USSR
Speed, proficiency, and effectiveness in the decisions that could impact the creation of good employment
stop the human rights abuses to people with disabilities that are employees of the government...shameful
Compliance with Access to Information Act, and more robust oversight on the processing of ATIP requests
Charity begins at home.  Government should look after Canadians first and then outsiders and refugees.
Corrections - rights of inmates, improved inmate programs to support re-integration following release.
dont use this data to say you consult canadians if it wont acutally be implemneneted in policy making 
Government waste, inefficency, incompetence and misconduct through harassment and abuse of authority. 
-Healthy Canadians with better access to healthcare - shorter wait times for specialists and surgeries
Important to have a healthy democratic Canada, with ample opportunity for all Canadians to participate
Politicians not fulfilling election promises.  Tax system is way too complicated.  Western alienation.
Money (debt) creation & usury. We should be creating our own interest-free money for infrastructure. 
Positive mental and emotional health initiatives teaching positive psychology across the disciplines.
Basic science research and education in support of innovation; security and privacy for individuals.
Continued physical abuses of First Nations; discrimination in work in remote camps for First Nations
democracy and efficiency may not work simultaneously. Hope government of Canada can find a balance. 
Departments need to publish their multiyear IM/IT strategies(emphasizing expected business outcomes)
Governments that go as far as the continued abuse of its citizens rather than admit they were wrong.
Improve upon the travel times between work and home so that people can make better use of that time.
Pay public servants on time and accurately. Hold decision-makers accountable to the Phoenix debacle.
There should be more financial help for small rural communities to run and maintain community halls.
Defend Canadian water - part of environment but deserves separate attention. Defend Canadian water!
Good Education for everyone, Diversity and acceptance in our communities, we are all immigrants.  
Only three choices   Reinstating jihadists citizenship  Immigration policies   Illegal immigration
Reducing duplication of work throughout the government  Easy communication between departments    
using government's open data to allow companies to be competitive and innovative by accessing data
Ways of offering free visas to international students interested to study in Canada. Am one please
Economic growth through innovation and in-house design and development in the engineering sector.
Fix the phoenix pay system and correct the issues in a more realistic time frame than "long term"
Healthy Canadians,Income security and employment,Well managed and efficient government operations
More questions regarding privacy of citizens and transparency should be included in this survey. 
Please give prior to all immigrants application whose applied is still pending for several years.
Using data to solve problems in cooperation with resources and organizations outside government. 
Allowing Canadians to be actively involved in decision making of high cost through voting/polls.
Being leaders in net neutrality, clean energy, education, innovation and having healthy citizens
Make it simple, make it understandable, 2+2 should always be 4 and depending who your lawyer is!
respect for charter rights - 'national security' exceptionalism only in cases of extreme threat 
Can the Government make the way they calculate income taxes more understandable? it's confusing
Dealing with poverty in Canada  Ensuring that all Canadians have access to clean drinking water
Making sure governments do what they say they are going to do EVEN WHEN IT IS NOT AN ELECTION! 
Quit wasting so much time and money on diversity and immigration.  it is weakening our country.
Simplify federal budget(s) for citizen's to fully understand financial plans and debt servicing
Accountability for members of the government who fail to abide by ethical AND moral standards.
Fair diversity policies/ Independent Canadian Foreign Policies not subject to other countries.
First Nations input/ First Nations Leadership/ First Nations transparency between governments 
Freedom of speech and Government regulations that seek to limit this freedom. e.g. bill M-103
Improving wages so increasing the minimum wage and employers striving to provide Living Wage.
just i will thank's for all the steps u are doing for live people more secured and relax life
less empty talk, more doing; wish governmental officials were more transparent and competent.
MPs and Cabinet members who break the rules, should be fired/thown out of Caucus immediately.
Negotiate for a fair NAFTA, but not at any cost. Maybe so slowly that the opposition changes.
Open provision of non-personal data that can help drive sustainable and economic development.
Always ensure that I have one individual (my MP) who is accountable to me and my neighbours.
Better tax breaks / credits / or incentives to entrepreneurs starting new business ventures.
Managing the judicial and social aspects of developing technologies (computers, robotics).  
Our governments need to focus on improving Canada instead of preparing for the next election
unemployment and underemployment should be addressed before allowing more people to migrate.
Welfare funding should be screened.  People should work-do not depend on the welfare systems
Working with and having more influence over Provincial government and municipal governments 
Ability to maintain the Canadian culture and not have it lost with the influx of immigrants
Being able to provide input on all issues that the government faces with respect to Canada.
Cut ties to those outside influence that have a negative impact on all of Canada and Canada
easy access and monitoring of the information the various gov'ts collect and share about me
Entrepreneurship /intellectual property - what Canadians are starting up and what they own.
Equitable tax system that does not penalize those that work harder or own small businesses.
Government needs to be held accountable to follow through on promised projects or spending.
Missing children who have been switched. More DNA options for verification of your parents.
being confident that government decision-making is based on evidence and high-quality data
manage and limit spending on social programs effectively to reduce tax burden on citizens.
Open government is an oxymoron when those elected are driven by self interest. Disgraceful
Sharing data and strengthening international partnerships and public-private partnerships.
slow down immigration to give current newcomers a chance to adapt to our society & culture
Strong measures needed to keep unauthorized/unlicensed away from all levels of Government 
The cost to tax payers when a new government makes changes or cancels prior legislation.  
the programs to manage  the education in manage the risk of canabis and the intimidation, 
Fair governance and stable rules (laws &regulations) to ensure reasonable predictability 
Find a way to prove that taxpayer funds are being used in the most efficient way possible
Just what it should be, open and consulting with Canadians and not just the ruling party.
Keeping our resources safe, protecting our environment, not selling out or overdeveloping
Reducing the financial burden for our children by eliminating deficit budget and spending
I am concerned with Government spending and increased taxes. Less government is needed. 
Knowing what is going on, and knowing what is motivating those who are making decisions.
Accountability for government that breaks laws,not a $200 fine for a multi-millionaire.
being heard as an individual, benefiting individuals who work hard for money they earn.
Better Income security and employment for seasoned (experienced) immigration population
Manage the tax dollars efficiently and ensure that what is spend has measurable results
None of the strategic outcomes addresses Canada's relationship with Indigenous people. 
Settle all first nations land claims ; and Canadian poverty first before international.
 ability to share our suggestions with government and response on citizens suggestions
1. Details on individual lobbying activities - amount of time and cost of interactions
Additional Services: highways, roads are Canadians can drive safe during snow season. 
Canada should maintain its impartial and fair dealings with all nations and countries.
How about NOT paying money to terrorists and instead keeping them out of our country. 
Policy about refugee and spending on refugee, policy about employment and immigration 
The children are the future and they need a window of opportunity to progress in life.
Women's rights and gender and sexuality   Spreading freedom and democracy in the world
Would have made more than 3 choices on some of the questions if given the opportunity.
More transparent the government can be, the more Canadians can trust the government!!
Move Canada away from extractive resources quickly toward renewable energy generation
Only choosing three why not rank them of importance really do better with your poll. 
Open and transparent government in relations to dealings with First Nations and INAC.
Tax evasion and fiscal paradise need to be addressed for the benefit of ALL Canadians
Awareness of our history, and the relationship of the Crown with Indigenous peoples.
canada first .quit trying to save the world.have quebec pull its own weight or leave
I think Canadians should be consulted on matters that affect the country as a whole.
i want to get a specific task so i enhance my knowledge and communication skills    
importance of all citizens whether they come from government or opposition ridings  
Low income/Disability issues regarding Health, Housing, and Government involvement  
Not sure why I cant pick ALL previous questions as they are all of equal importance 
Selection based on academic competencies and commitment to consultants and Canadians
Simplified tax system and reduction both in time and cost of government bureaucracy 
Transparency, simplicity and fairness in the process of Citizenship and Immigration.
Full transparency, accountability and responsive provincial and federal government.
Inclusion of Indigenous Peoples into Federal Government decision making processes  
Integrate more referendums like Switzerland does. Areas and issues to be confirmed.
Policy based on potential outcome for people and clear wording of policy and acts. 
Reducing the number of immigrants and refugees we accept into our country annually.
Too many needless secrecy in government. Too much wasteful spending in Government. 
More adequate and speedy ways to assess disabilities and other benefit eligibility
Transparency of governments  Access to public information and social participation
Complete and accurate vetting of all immigrants; speedy deportation of criminals.
government should give proper way to  public  for achieve and gain goal in life  
Holding Senior Bureaucrats to account for the Day to Day Business of Government. 
Please address the offshore bank accounts problem seriously. No matter who falls.
Stop all the wasted spending.  Balance the budget.  Stop going further into debt.
Strong and independent democratic institutions and Income security and employment
The government does not need to hold a monopoly on cannabis sales or cultivation 
When someone in government gets caught lying, do the Honorable thing and resign. 
With technology as a gateway, Canadians making decisions on the passing of Bills.
Believe that openness should also include interaction with Canada Revenue Agency
Do not let ISIS people back into CANADA. Ever. They made their choice. No No No.
Immigrants should be a part of Canada and not should be looked upon as a Refugee
Our government needs to be an ethical, principles based government in all cases.
People emigrating to this country adopt our customs and leave theirs at the gate
Efficiently run government.  National housing program.  Fresh water protection.
Government employee benefits must be disclosed and available for every citizen.
real democracy, not oligarchy. we've to a LONG way to go to attain real change.
SENIORS SHOULD BE ALLOWED TO LIVE A DECENT LIFE BY ALLOWING MORE  TAX BENEFITS 
change the first-past-the-post electoral system to provide more representation
immigration must be in short time  all immigration must be online for everyone
National defense  Space exploration  Trade with all countries other than USA  
Open government should make hiring and appointment processes more transparent.
retirement payments for the people who put the money there in the first place.
The government should make creating and maintaining open data sets a priority.
caution in spending my grandchildrens tax dollar (plan for a balanced budget)
Inclusive society that respect differences and is commited to reconciliation.
Limited senator terms with appointment by election. Online voting in election
Make the bureaucrats (and suppliers) answer for their blunders, e.g., Phoenix
Making ownership of companies, based on there tax filing, readily availiable.
offering young Canadians opportunities to advance and have meaningful careers
a fourth important startegic outcome would be economic growth - of course!!!
A way to submit comments and suggestions and receive feedback electronically
Be able to work to together put are differences between provinces outside...
I consider Electoral Reform to be an important component of open government.
TO FOCUS 100% ON THE PRIORITIES OF ITS CURRENT CITIZENS AND THOSE TO BECOME 
We need more military spending .  And secure our borders following the USA .
1. Reconciliation with Indigenous Canadians and transparency surrounding it
access to your own personal information, ability to contact & reach someone
Better access to in-house care for young adults seeking mental health help.
Especially the CRA, they need to work with Canadians, listen to the people.
Hold every citizen on the same scale; avoid preferential treatment for rich
there were a large amount of options that seamed to be repetitive or vague 
I could have listed far more priorities than 3 in the previous question :)
I trust that bringing this is for a good purpose  so do not get distracted
It was so hard to pick just three because they are all so important to me!
Proportional representation (dual member proportional being my preference)
Seria bueno un cupo para Colombianos con ganas de ir a estudiar y crecer. 
We must realize that the health of the planet trumps profit in any sector.
Change the voting system away from first past the post to a ranked ballot
Implementation and evaluation of policies (suggesting possible iteration)
Reduction of corruption  Reduction of corruption  Reduction of corruption
Strengthening the relationship between Canadians and Indigenous Peoples!!
Tax breaks to rich,nepotism,  working poor issues, Canadian homelessness 
Accountability to the people who's lives are destroyed by goVT employees
Data analytics, performance measurement, outcome based decision making. 
diversity inclusion of LGBTQ2 in the contract as an equity seeking group
Ensuring first nations are brought out of their disadvantaged situations
Establishing a community of practice on the back on government data sets
Government to provide the purpose of its national decisions and programs
Having guaranteed minimum income for all Canadians and global citizens  
Making government actions open by default rather than closed by default.
public consultations on Canada's participation in international treaties
Putting the needs of Canadians first, and foremost over foreign matters.
Health -from a holistic perspective, through the determinants of health
LAWS make by previous goverment  must not change  LIKE  FRAUD marriages
More openness and accessibility for staff regarding phoenix pay issues.
Protecting our education system, improving secondary education funding.
Providing support to public libraries as a gateway for open government.
Transparency in terms of plans and meaningful wide ranging consultation
working to improve the living conditions of Indigenous people in Canada
Addressing environmental issue such as climate change more seriously. 
Canada Government to get involve with the actual crisis in Venezuela. 
Democratic system that reflects the view of the majority of Canadians 
Government over spending, common sense business practices, lower taxes
government spending should be brought under control to reduce the debt
phoenix pay system should be stopped. someone should be accountable!!!
terrible, inefficient, wasteful policies and spending in departments. 
Using technology to make interacting with government easier and faster
Clear understanding of Data controllership, and protection of privacy
Equity in access to opportunity -- strong public education foundation
Proportional Representation, 2 vote's 1 for the party & 1 for the MP,
Truth & Reconciliation Continue as a priority & the Inquest into MMIW
Addressing hate crimes and racial , gender, and cultural biases.    
Open Government means balanced and proportional representation - now
stop selling out to corporations and dont sell canadian assists....
Believe it is very important to get the national debt load reduced.
Concern about invasion of privacy through government surveillance .
secure borders and fast removal of illegal border crossing persons.
* Open Education  * Open Innovation  * Community-driven innovation
Ensuring employees of the government are supported and developed. 
I would like mostly everything to made and manufactured in Canada.
I'll be glad if the previous questions could be addressed properly
Lack of financial help to the middle class when something happens!
Open and free exchange of ideas and information (Net Neutrality). 
Programs to help individual seniors  Programs to help homelessness
Raise old age pension for those seniors who need the extra income.
sponsorship of parents as permanent residence should be applied.  
That everyone is being heard, acknowledged, and given explanation.
The 16 priorities capture the key areas well, from my perspective.
The rudeness of some government employees, to the Canadian public.
Canadian independence of US   Protection of Canadian water supply
Concerns of how the government is infringing on religious freedom
Electoral reform. This was a main promise that was not delivered.
Full discussion and disclosure PRIOR to announcing major reforms.
Good job Government of Canada!  Keep doing what you are doing!!  
Health System    Environmental problems. Canadians do not recycle
Knowing who MPs meet with regularly, civil society and lobbyist. 
More interaction with our members of parliament on regular basis.
Action on Climate Change Adaptation and GreenHouse Gas Reduction
canada to continue as a symbol of peace and safe country for all
CRA restructuring and computer systems- not efficient at all !!!
Honest and verifiable dollar figures for government budget items
How credible is the supposed transparent info that is published?
Income inequality and the future of work in an automated world. 
No, all the main aspects of a good open government were listed. 
Protection for pension plans from companies that steal from them
Smaller government  Less red tape  Better inter-provincial trade
Where the party in government gets its political funding from!!!
Greater decision-making focus on long run benefits to Canadians
Guaranteed living wage and universal access to adequate housing
Immigration opportunities for other than workers and inverstors
Accountability of individual MPs to resolve regional concerns.
Are rights are being diminish by are goverment daily not right
being notified of opportunities to contribute to policy-making
Direct democracy (like in Switzerland / Iceland) will be good.
health benefits for the elderly, easier access to GOOD doctors
Help for seniors so they can afford to live in their own homes
Indigenous well-being (health and wellness, land claims, etc.)
making investments today for our children to prosper in Canada
More focus on Canadians less on the problems of other contries
Putting a stop to accepting terrorists back into this coiuntry
Transparency of political party and candidate funding sources.
Various support services for Canadians while travelling abroad
We need a new electoral system to replace first past the post.
Federal accountability without the usual political rhetoric. 
How about reducing poverty at home?! First Nations situations
I think that the 16 priorities cover my interests in general.
Immigration issues are they well trained ethical and truthful
Secure workplaces, safe environmental conditions, Safe cities
UNDRIP, Reconciliation, and Treaty Implementation agreements 
Would the government be open all of the time, or just 9 to 5?
  Transparent, accountable and responsive Federal government
1. Reduction of national debt.  2. Reduce government waste!!
Are extraterrestrials influencing our government and others?
Begin negotiations On Turks and Caicos joining Confederation
Help Canadian develop new skill for the new evolving economy
Quit spending so much money and start saving for the future!
reduction in personal mortgage cost if used for investments.
being global leader for issues with in or out side Canada. 
Collaboration with other FCC to learn about best practices.
Education of Children and in particular Aboriginal children
-focus of truth and reconciliation with Indigenous peoples 
Government transparency, Safe and secure workplace, Poverty
Holding government accountable for fiscal responsibility . 
Indigenous Policies & Funding. Veterans Policies & Funding.
Keep un the good work, I like what I see and what I hear...
layout ongoing costs as they accumulate on govt initiatives
provincial access to coastal ports for international trade.
Stop the out-of-control spending and lack of accountability
The proper treatment of the native people's of our Country.
They are all important issues and many of equal importance.
being able to effectively contact and communicate with CRA
Easy Access to my Pension and Income tax records and files
Easy, equitable access to government data and information.
Ei ang quitting your job because of a learning Disability 
just every day improve the health and the quality of life.
Less involvement with the UN, more involvement with the US
More availability for negotiation on government decisions 
Paying your government employees fairly, i.e. fix Pheonix!
Balanced budget - stop borrowing from the next generation
Combating fake information, strengthen a non-basis media.
Facilitate clear pathways to participation and advocacy. 
MORE DIVERSITY IN PROVIDING OPPORTUNITIES TO MINORITIES  
pension  being able to contact the government more easier
Please reinstate the promise to reform the voting system.
Respect and act on the issue canadians really care about.
We should have a national referendum on multiculturalism.
I could have selected more items on the previous list!  
More oportunities (study, work, like) for foreing people
Nation to Nation relationship with first Nation people  
Our fundamental need: 'Peace, Order and Good Government'
Publish standards and APIs for open gov't data sources. 
Really concerned about Government overspending...deficit
1. Honesty in government officials  2. Balanced budget 
Alignment and inclusion of Self-governing First Nations
No, I am satisfied with what was covered in this survey
open source software would help in gov. being more open
Openess on Indigenous issues especially reconciliation.
Removing the influence of special groups and lobbyists.
the previous list is very extensive, hard to pick top 3
Universal Childcare - this is THE most important issue.
Admit Phoenix is a gigantic mistake and get rid of it.
Be able to have a voice in government decision making 
Democratic government  Rule of law  Internal security 
Fix or replace Phoenix NOW. Nothing is more important.
Mental health care  Physical medical care  Dental care
Transparency in decisions regarding Immigration cases.
Government must walk to walk, not just talk the talk.
innovation - both in government and Canadian industry
Integrated Client Information for Government Services
Once law is law, how come it is impossible to change?
must have control on foreign immigrants activities. 
Stronger fiscal management and deficit/debt control.
Defined Benefit Pension security for all Canadians.
Raise the community to become an example to urge it
Reducing government overhead and internal red tape.
Supporting the education of youth and young adults.
The economy and the environment cannot be separated
Tuition aid for Students in College and University 
diversity   fnim inclusion   rationality concerns 
Money an our extra people coming in to our country
Supporting our Judeo-Christian heritage and values
*Accountability for excessive government spending
Economic growth; fair workplace; well managed....
Everything is good  Need more job force out there
Fiscal accountability of the Federal Government. 
local government agencies transparent opperations
One common interdepartmental portal for employees
Well managed and efficient government operations 
Answer questions as asked and not play politics.
-Clean and healthy environment  -Global commerce
I'd like to know about minister accountability. 
Immigration options for people around the world.
Increased services and funding for First Nations
JUST KEEP THE RUSSIAN BLUES FOR PR AND CITIZENS.
lifes quality of people in Canada (happyness ) 
National debt, National security, Immigration.  
Poverty reduction   Vibrant and diverse culture 
Proportional representation in federal elections
Provide better services for low income families 
Security and work for the north of the maritime 
Well managed and efficient government operations
accountability in reaching out to first nations
Choosing only 3 in the last question was tough!
Equal rites and discrimination free environment
Job creations and supporting local entrepeneurs
Opportunities to be opened to everyone as equal
Please Give Job Opportunity to Poor People..   
Protect free speech and avoid compelled speech.
Standing more for human rights around the Globe
Addressing violence against women and children
engage equitably to ensure safety for Canadian
Our country's environment is in desperate need of our attention, and this isn't the first time we have heard how damaging the waste and pollution of the logging industry is. However, environmental health experts have agreed on something that should be a worry to all Australian citizens: The amount of toxic chemicals

Our country's environment is already considered in great danger because of the gas industry's practice of spraying thousands of litres of highly toxic chemicals into the air, water and soil. One industry-funded study, that uses known industry figures that claim they need more dioxin to make fracking profitable, claimed that around 1,000 serious adverse health effects have been reported in Texas. An internationally renowned study found that fracking causes symptoms and diseases that are similar to those of oilfield workers who are exposed to the real danger of the process.

Our country's environment is our biggest threat. Some would say it is our most pressing issue. I'll argue that it is more fundamental than that. Our environment is our lifeblood. Without it we simply cannot live. The late environmentalist, Ralph Nader, once quipped, "If the environment of your country depends on what happens in a foreign country, you have bigger problems than foreign policy." As leaders of business and government, we all have a critical role to play. There is no doubt in my mind that the commitment to reducing environmental degradation is the single most important contribution our society can make to solve this planet's biggest crisis, climate change.

This bill is a disgrace. As citizens of this country it is our duty to protect our environment from the hands of the most despotic government in the world. This is not what we signed up for.
I lived in a shelter most of my adult life and I think that gender neutral bathrooms are ridiculous. I am far more at ease in a public men's room than I am in a public women's restroom. Call me a coward, but I feel safer in a men's restroom than I do in a women's restroom. Maybe it's just me. It isn't something I would want to risk, but I can understand the discomfort in some other situations. I still don't like it. A person who lives and breathes gender stereotypes and has a deep sense of political correctness needs to look at themselves in the mirror. Would you like to know how they feel about gender neutral bathrooms in government buildings?

I lived in a shelter most of my adult life and I think that gender neutral bathrooms are ridiculous. Sure, people are very divided on this topic. It's not just women versus men. It's young versus old. It's black versus white. It's Jewish versus atheist. It's all the different groups of marginalized people who, quite frankly, don't feel safe around men who say they are women.


If passed, this bill would be really terrible for my farm. The environmental consequences are just plain horrible. It would make farming dirtier , water more expensive and land more scarce. It would be a recipe for environmental disaster. The EPA has estimated that the total economic cost to agriculture in the US would be at least $7 billion


